Piano Concerto No. 1 in D-flat Major, Op. 10,  concerto for piano by Russian composer Sergey Prokofiev, which jolted early 20th-century audiences with its unorthodox treatment of melodic and harmonic material as well as with its aggressive—if not percussive—approach to rhythm. The work was completed in 1912, and it premiered that same year in Moscow—with the composer himself as soloist.
Prokofiev studied composition at the St. Petersburg Conservatory and, after receiving his diploma in 1909, took additional courses in piano. As a composer, he frequently shocked audiences with works that boasted unusual key changes and diabolically intricate rhythms. As a pianist, he likewise generated controversy, which culminated in 1914 when he entered the conservatory’s concerto competition. While most of his competitors took the conventional path and played a concerto by Beethoven or one of the other established masters in the field, Prokofiev performed his own Piano Concerto No. 1. Many of the judges, apparently irked by Prokofiev’s bravado, voted against him, but others insisted that he deserved the first prize. Ultimately, Prokofiev won the competition, which not only sent him home with a grand piano but placed him in the brightest of spotlights as both a performer and a composer for the rest of his career.
That the entire Piano Concerto No. 1 consisted of just a single movement, as opposed to the typical three movements, was already unusual, but Prokofiev further “violated” the conventional patterns of thematic development as he juggled, shaped, and reshaped numerous musical fragments to suit his own pleasure. Moreover, he was more interested in rhythm than in melody, and in his hands the piano became more akin to a percussion instrument. The effect was both intense and dramatic. In several ways, however, Piano Concerto No. 1 resembles a typical concerto in that the piece begins and ends with fast tempi, after a middle section of quieter moods, and like a typical sonata-form movement, opens with a strong theme, departs from that theme, and returns to it to conclude the composition. Beyond those features, any resemblance of the work to a concerto of the Classical period is only superficial.
