Quintet,  a musical composition for five instruments or voices; also, a group of five musicians performing such a composition.
The string quintet normally includes two violins, two violas, and a cello. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s six works for this medium are considered among his greatest achievements in chamber music. The composer and virtuoso cellist Luigi Boccherini favoured a second cello in place of the second viola; he composed 113 quintets for this combination as well as a dozen for the more usual instrumentation. Franz Schubert’s Quintet in C Major, Opus 163 (1828), likewise has two cellos.
The piano quintet—usually piano and string quartet—is an enduringly popular medium with composers. The best-known piano quintets include those by the Romantic composers Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms, César Franck, and Antonin Dvořák; more recent examples are those by the Russian composer Dmitry Shostakovich (1940) and the American composers Walter Piston (1949) and William Bolcom (2004). Probably the most famous of all piano quintets is Schubert’s Piano Quintet in A Major, Opus 114 (1819; Trout Quintet), which is for piano, violin, viola, cello, and double bass.
Other quintet combinations are not uncommon. Boccherini composed 18 quintets for flute or oboe with the normal complement of strings; Mozart’s and Brahms’s quintets for clarinet and string quartet are among their best-known works, as is Mozart’s quintet for piano, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, and horn, K 452 (1784). The standard instrumentation of a wind quintet is flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, and horn; a brass quintet has two trumpets, horn, trombone, and tuba. Both genres have been popular since the 19th century.
Vocal quintets are usually written for two sopranos, alto, tenor, and bass. Much other literature for five voice parts exists—16th-century madrigals, for example—but the name quintet is usually not applied to it. Vocal quintets also occur in opera; a notable example is in Act III of Richard Wagner’s opera Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg (1868; “The Mastersingers of Nuremberg”).
