The Mikado, in full The Mikado; or, The Town of Titipu,  operetta in two acts by W.S. Gilbert (libretto) and Sir Arthur Sullivan (music) that premiered at the Savoy Theatre in London on March 14, 1885. The work was a triumph from the beginning. Its initial production ran for 672 performances, and within a year some 150 other companies were performing the operetta in England and the United States. One of its best-known numbers is Ko-Ko’s song “I’ve Got a Little List,” for which directors through a century and beyond have made a point of changing phrases to build in contemporary cultural references to those who “never would be missed.”
When The Mikado was composed, Londoners had been enthusiastic about all things Japanese since the opening of Japan to the West in the mid-1850s. At the time of the operetta’s premiere, crowds were flocking to the Japanese Village exhibit in the Knightsbridge area of London; this reconstructed village featured men and women from Japan who demonstrated their crafts and their way of life. From his own visit to the exhibit, Gilbert drew inspiration for some of the finishing details of his libretto; he even hired a Japanese woman he met there to instruct the cast in proper Japanese mannerisms, fan use, and makeup. Further realistic touches for the opera were supplied by the famed Hawes Craven, a scene painter noted for his unprecedented realism.
As in much of the Gilbert and Sullivan canon, there is sharp commentary in The Mikado upon contemporary English society. For example, Gilbert makes the character Pooh-Bah a government official in charge of everything (including complaints about himself), as a prominent man in a small English town might actually be. Similarly, the pivot of the plot—a law that condemns a man to death for the crime of flirting—can be seen as a comment on the outdated laws lingering in England at the time.
The music too is cleverly wrought. In his entrance aria (“A Wand’ring Minstrel I”) Nanki-Poo, the romantic leading man, declares himself capable of offering a song in any mood, from folksy to martial to nautical, and Sullivan set each of the subsequent verses to music of suitable character. Later, in a trio for three other male characters (“I Am So Proud”), Sullivan gave each man his own melody. These are presented separately, then combined into an intricate counterpoint that recalls the mastery of Johann Sebastian Bach. The Mikado may be a light and comic tale, but Sullivan saw no reason why the music could not reflect a serious level of craft, which is part of what raised Gilbert and Sullivan operettas above the standard of their competition and why their work remains popular.
The Mikado is set in the 1880s, in the imaginary Japanese town of Titipu.
In the courtyard of Ko-Ko’s palace.
Ko-Ko and a chorus of Japanese nobles sing the praises of their culture, correcting Western stereotypes and declaring that they are gentlemen from Japan (Chorus: “If You Want to Know Who We Are”). Nanki-Poo, disguised as a ragged balladeer with a guitar, asks where he can find the maiden Yum-Yum, Ko-Ko’s ward. The nobles ask who he is. He says that he is a minstrel and demonstrates his sentimental, patriotic, and seafaring songs (“A Wand’ring Minstrel I”).
Pish-Tush asks Nanki-Poo the nature of his business with Yum-Yum. The young man explains that he had fallen in love with her at first sight a year before, but she was then engaged to Ko-Ko. Nanki-Poo has since learned that Ko-Ko was condemned to death for flirting, so he has come to find her. Pish-Tush advises the young man that the emperor (“Our Great Mikado”) has wisely punished flirters, so the townspeople appointed Ko-Ko Lord High Executioner, and, since criminals must be executed in the order of their conviction, he “cannot cut off another’s head until he’s cut his own off.” Then Pooh-Bah, the Lord High Everything Else, tells Nanki-Poo that Yum-Yum will marry Ko-Ko that very day (Trio: “Young Man, Despair”).
Nanki-Poo barely has time to grieve when he is interrupted by the grand arrival of Ko-Ko himself (“Behold the Lord High Executioner!”). Ko-Ko tells the assembled crowd of his “little list of society offenders who might well be underground” and, if executed, “never would be missed” (“I’ve Got a Little List”). He then attempts to seek Pooh-Bah’s advice, in that nobleman’s multifarious official capacities, as to how much he should spend on his wedding—and how much Pooh-Bah should be “insulted” by a bribe.
Their discussion is interrupted by the arrival of a group of young women, along with Yum-Yum and her sisters, Peep-Bo and Pitti-Sing (Trio: “Three Little Maids from School”). Recognizing Nanki-Poo, they rush over to him, and Nanki-Poo blurts out to Ko-Ko that he is in love with Yum-Yum. Ko-Ko orders him removed and then introduces the girls to the lofty Pooh-Bah, who is offended by their giggling. The girls apologize (Quartet: “So Please You, Sir, We Much Regret”).
When everyone but Yum-Yum has left, Nanki-Poo returns, declares his love, and reveals that he is really the Mikado’s son. He has had to disguise himself to avoid being married off to the elderly Katisha. Nanki-Poo tells Yum-Yum of his feelings (Duet: “Were You Not to Ko-Ko Plighted”). They kiss and depart in sorrow.
Pooh-Bah and Pish-Tush deliver a letter from the Mikado to Ko-Ko. The Mikado is disappointed with the lack of executions and threatens to abolish the office of Lord High Executioner and to lower the status of the town of Titipu to a mere village, unless somebody is beheaded within a month. Ko-Ko is technically next up for execution, as his colleagues point out, but he argues that beheading himself would, for one thing, be suicide (a capital offense) and, for another, constitute an act that he could not perform up to his own standards. Each of the three men declines the honour of the “short, sharp shock” of decapitation (Trio: “I Am So Proud”).
Nanki-Poo enters, intending to hang himself. Ko-Ko suggests that Nanki-Poo agree to be executed instead, thus standing in for Ko-Ko. Nanki-Poo agrees after some argument but only on condition that he be allowed to marry Yum-Yum immediately, with the execution to be held a month later. The townspeople enter to hear Ko-Ko’s decision: Yum-Yum is to marry Nanki-Poo. General rejoicing ensues but is interrupted by the imperious Katisha. She claims her “perjured lover, Nanki-Poo” and is about to reveal that he is the Mikado’s son when Yum-Yum incites the crowd to drown her out. Katisha vows revenge.
In Ko-Ko’s garden and palace.
Yum-Yum and her bridesmaids prepare for her wedding (“Braid the Raven Hair”). Alone, Yum-Yum soliloquizes on her own loveliness (“The Sun Whose Rays”). Pitti-Sing and Peep-Bo return and tactlessly remind Yum-Yum that her marriage is to be cut short by her husband’s execution. Nanki-Poo and Pish-Tush enter and try to cheer her up. But the merry madrigal they all sing (Quartet: “Brightly Dawns Our Wedding Day”) ends in sorrow.
Ko-Ko comes in to announce that he has discovered a law that decrees that when a married man is executed, his wife is to be buried alive. Yum-Yum begins to have second thoughts about marrying Nanki-Poo, as burial alive is “such a stuffy death.” But if she backs out, she faces the equally unpleasant prospect of marrying Ko-Ko (Trio: “Here’s a How-de-do!”).
Nanki-Poo again threatens to commit suicide, but Ko-Ko cannot allow that—if he does not officially execute Nanki-Poo within a month, he will have to execute himself. So Nanki-Poo urges Ko-Ko to execute him immediately, but Ko-Ko is too squeamish to do it. Ko-Ko then hits on the idea of making a false affidavit stating that Nanki-Poo has already been executed. He agrees that Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum can be married at once, as long as they leave for good.
A procession enters announcing the arrival of the Mikado, who is accompanied by the fearsome Katisha, “his daughter-in-law elect.” The Mikado boasts:
Ko-Ko assures the Mikado that the execution he ordered has just taken place, with corroboration from Pitti-Sing and Pooh-Bah (Quartet: “The Criminal Cried”). Although the Mikado is pleased to hear this, his real purpose in coming is to find his son, who is using the name Nanki-Poo. In a panic, Ko-Ko declares that he has gone abroad—to Knightsbridge. But Katisha cries out in anguish as she spots Nanki-Poo’s name on the death certificate. Ko-Ko and his confederates abjectly apologize. The Mikado excuses them—after all, his son was in disguise, and the town’s leaders were anxious to abide by his order for an execution—but he reminds them that killing the heir apparent has consequences nonetheless and requires a punishment that is “something humorous, but lingering, with either boiling oil or melted lead.” They bemoan their fate (Quintet: “See How the Fates Their Gifts Allot”).
After the Mikado and Katisha depart, Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum appear; they are on their way to their honeymoon. Ko-Ko declares that Nanki-Poo is reprieved, but the young man refuses “to come back to life” unless Ko-Ko takes Katisha off his hands by marrying her. Then life will be good (Quintet: “The Flowers That Bloom in the Spring”). Dancing, everyone leaves.
Katisha enters and soliloquizes on her lonely state (“Alone, and Yet Alive”). Ko-Ko arrives and begins to woo her passionately. When she resists, he tells the sad tale of a bird’s unrequited love (“Tit-Willow”). Katisha, greatly affected, yields to Ko-Ko’s plea and coyly asks if he will not hate her for being “a little teeny weeny wee bit bloodthirsty.” Ko-Ko reassures her, and they celebrate before dancing off together (Duet: “There Is Beauty in the Bellow of the Blast”).
The Mikado and the townspeople return for the execution of Ko-Ko, Pitti-Sing, and Pooh-Bah. But Katisha pleads for mercy for Ko-Ko, whom she has just married, and for the others. The Mikado hesitates because he believes they executed his son, but Nanki-Poo appears. Katisha erupts in fury. Ko-Ko then defuses the situation in an ingenious way. When the Mikado says, “‘Let a thing be done,’ it’s as good as done,” declares Ko-Ko, so why not simply state that the execution has been completed? The Mikado finds the curious logic satisfactory and then commutes Ko-Ko’s sentence from death to life with Katisha. With everyone reconciled and content, the people of Titipu rejoice and celebrate the marriage of Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum.
