The Merry Widow, German Die lustige Witwe,  comic operetta in three acts by Hungarian composer Franz Lehár (libretto in German by Viktor Léon and Leo Stein, based upon L’Attaché d’ambassade by Henri Meilhac) that premiered at the Theater an der Wien in Vienna on December 30, 1905. The operetta was to become one of the most popular in the repertoire. Its best-known selections are the final waltz duet “Lippen schweigen” and the soprano’s Act II aria “Vilja.”
The Merry Widow had an obstacle-filled route to success. The librettists and theatre producer first had the opera set by Austrian composer Richard Heuberger, whose operetta Der Opernball (1898) was quite popular at the time. Léon and Stein found Heuberger’s music for The Merry Widow unsatisfactory, and they turned to the theatre for suggestions. The secretary of the Theater an der Wien suggested Lehár, who had not previously composed this kind of comic operetta. The skeptical librettists asked Lehár to compose an aria from the work as an audition, and they were pleased with the result. The theatre’s manager, however, was not happy with the finished operetta. Nonetheless, the production went forward. The initial performances earned some criticism, but within a few years the operetta had become an international hit.
Just as the libretto—which is set in “Pontevedro,” a thinly disguised stand-in for Montenegro—reflects a Balkan atmosphere, so does the music evoke folk culture. Lehár was familiar with traditional eastern European music, and in his earlier stage works he had already used dances that reflected Russian and other Slavic styles. In The Merry Widow he gives the characters Hanna and Danilo a spirited kolo (a dance form) in the second act, and he uses rustic and folk elements throughout the work. He evokes a polonaise, marches, Parisian cancans and galops, a cafe song, and the most exquisite of waltzes. Lehár’s charming and skillful interweaving of musical colours is one reason for the great longevity of The Merry Widow.
The Merry Widow is set in Paris around 1905.
At the Pontevedrian embassy in Paris, a gala party is in progress, yet worry is the mood of the day. The young Pontevedrian widow, Hanna Glawari, has it in her power to bankrupt the nation. If she chooses to marry a Frenchman, Pontevedro will lose her fortune. In desperation the envoy, Baron Zeta, attempts to persuade his countryman Count Danilo to marry Hanna before it is too late. In fact, Hanna and Danilo had once been sweethearts, but his family had rejected her because she was then poor. Now that she is rich, he does not want to court her just for money. He declares that he would rather spend his time ogling the dancing girls at Maxim’s, all of whom he knows by name. Even Hanna’s attentions to him at the embassy dance are insufficient to change his mind. Meanwhile, Zeta, though he does not know it, has romantic problems of his own. His young wife, Valencienne, is carrying on a flirtation with a Frenchman, Camille de Rosillon; although she protests to her suitor that she is “a respectable wife,” she does not entirely discourage his advances.
At her Parisian home, Hanna hosts a party, complete with Pontevedrian folk dancers and singers. She sings a folk ballad (“Vilja”) about the love of a huntsman for a maiden of the woods. The men of the embassy are still worried about her potential marriage plans. In a lively discussion, they agree that they will never understand women. Hanna and Danilo jest about romance, denying their mutual feelings. Valencienne again deflects Camille’s attentions. She writes “I am a respectable wife” on her fan, but she agrees to join him in the summerhouse. Zeta, spying on them through a keyhole, is enraged. Before he can act, Hanna, with the assistance of Njegus, the embassy clerk, takes Valencienne’s place. When Hanna and Camille emerge from the summerhouse, they pretend to be engaged. Danilo, who was beginning to acknowledge to himself his feelings for Hanna, is furious, and he leaves to drown his sorrows at Maxim’s.
A replica of Maxim’s has been built at Hanna’s house to fool Danilo, who is brought unsuspecting onto the scene. The grisettes, with the addition of a playful Valencienne, perform their dance act from Maxim’s, putting Danilo at ease. Hanna reveals to him the secret of the summerhouse, and at last they confess their mutual love. In the midst of their happiness, Zeta discovers Valencienne’s fan, which proves that she had been in the summerhouse earlier. His fears are calmed when he sees the words Valencienne had written on the fan. With the two happy couples reunited, Pontevedrians and French alike reflect again on the challenge of understanding women.
