The Well-Tempered Clavier, BWV 846–893, German Das wohltemperierte Klavier, byname the Forty-eight,  collection of 48 preludes and fugues by Johann Sebastian Bach, published in two books (1722 and 1742). It explores the intricacies of each of the 12 major and 12 minor keys and constitutes the largest-scale and most-influential undertaking for solo keyboard of the Baroque era.
The compound adjective well-tempered in the title refers to the employment of a tuning system that would work equally well in all keys—a circumstance rare in Bach’s day. An example of such a system, though not the only one available, is that of equal temperament, in which the octave is divided into 12 semitones of exactly equal intervals (compare meantone temperament). Further, by using the word clavier, Bach indicated that his music could be played on any keyboard instrument, including harpsichord, clavichord, and organ. (The piano, newly invented in Italy, was unknown in Bach’s native Germany when the first book was published.) The collection takes advantage of the knowledge that though keyboard instruments have different mechanisms and produce distinctive sounds, any reasonably competent player can move from one to another without difficulty.
Together the two volumes of The Well-Tempered Clavier consist of 24 preludes paired with 24 fugues. Bach completed the first book while employed at the royal court in Köthen (Cothen) in the 1720s and the second some two decades later in Leipzig, where he had been appointed director of church music for the city. The pieces were intended as pedagogical exercises to give keyboard players experience in working with the chords, scales, and arpeggios in each key.
Among the renowned performers who have recorded The Well-Tempered Clavier on piano are Edwin Fischer, Rosalyn Tureck, Daniel Barenboim, Glenn Gould, Tatiana Nikolayeva, Vladimir Ashkenazy, Sviatoslav Richter, Angela Hewitt, and András Schiff. A performance by American composer Wendy (formerly Walter) Carlos of two of the prelude and fugue numbers from Book I is noteworthy for having been played on a Moog synthesizer (Switched-On Bach, 1968). She made other recordings of Baroque music on synthesizer as well, adapting for one recording the name The Well-Tempered Synthesizer (1969). One also may encounter selections from the complete set transcribed for other instruments and combinations of instruments, especially for string quartet.
