Trio sonata,  major chamber-music genre in the Baroque era (c. 1600–c. 1750), written in three parts: two top parts played by violins or other high melody instruments, and a basso continuo part played by a cello. The trio sonata was actually performed by four instruments, since the cello was supported by a harpsichord upon which a performer improvised harmonies implied by the written parts. In performance the instrumentation of a given piece may be varied, flutes or oboes replacing violins, for example, and bassoon or viola da gamba substituting for cello. Occasionally trio sonatas were performed orchestrally. The genre’s texture of one low and two high melody instruments (hence the name trio sonata) plus a harmony instrument was highly favoured during the Baroque era, not only for the trio sonata but for other forms of orchestra and chamber music.
The trio sonata was the most common variety of Baroque sonata, which developed from the late Renaissance canzona (q.v.), an instrumental piece in several sections in contrapuntal style. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, there were two types of trio sonata. The sonata da camera, or chamber sonata, intended for secular performance, consisted of several mostly dancelike movements, and the sonata da chiesa, or church sonata, was as a rule more contrapuntal. The number of movements varied, but the latter type usually consisted of four movements (slow-fast-slow-fast). Distinctions between the two types were by no means rigid; the church sonata might contain dance movements, not necessarily labeled as such, while the chamber sonata often adopted the fugal style (based on melodic imitation) typical of the church sonata’s opening movement.
Notable composers of trio sonatas include Arcangelo Corelli, George Frideric Handel, François Couperin, and Antonio Vivaldi. In the trio sonatas of Johann Sebastian Bach, the three parts are often played by fewer than three instruments; one top part might be played by violin and the other two parts by keyboard, or all three parts might be played on one organ (the two top parts on the keyboards and the bottom part on the pedals).
