Wozzeck,  opera in three acts by Austrian composer Alban Berg, who also wrote its German libretto, deriving the story from the unfinished play Woyzeck (the discrepancy in spelling was the result of a misreading of the manuscript) by Georg Büchner. The opera premiered in Berlin on December 14, 1925. Of all rule-breaking avant-garde operas, it is the oldest of those that appear in the active repertoire.
A dark story of madness and murder, Wozzeck is an adaptation of Büchner’s groundbreaking and highly influential work, which was in progress at the author’s death in 1837 and was not performed until 1913. After seeing the play’s Vienna premiere, Berg determined to base an opera on it, but his progress on the work was slowed by the advent of World War I and military service. He completed the opera in 1922 and published the vocal score privately in 1922. He presented orchestral excerpts from the opera in concert in 1924. When Berg’s work came to the stage at the Berlin Staatsoper a year later, it was an immediate hit. Its success dismayed Berg, who felt that the work should have been too modern for wide acceptance, and he began to question whether he had fallen short of his overall intention.
Berg tells the tale of Wozzeck’s madness with rhythmic and melodic fragments that carry moods from one scene to the next. As his mentor Arnold Schoenberg had taught him, Berg underlaid his music with compositional patterns going back hundreds of years. His harmonic structures sometimes verge into atonality, leaving the listener with no clear sense of the direction in which the music might move next. Atonality was an idea then in vogue among the Schoenberg circle, and it seemed ideally suited to reflect the protagonist’s precarious mental state and his descent into madness.
Wozzeck is set in a town near a military barracks during the first quarter of the 19th century.
The soldier Wozzeck and his captain debate morality. The Captain suggests that, because Wozzeck has an illegitimate child, Wozzeck is immoral. Wozzeck maintains that poor people cannot afford morality. Later, while cutting wood, he finds himself tormented by strange visions. Meanwhile, Marie—the mother of Wozzeck’s child—is watching a military band and admiring the Drum Major. Wozzeck arrives, wanting to share his visions, but he cannot bring himself to stay with her. To earn more money, Wozzeck submits himself to the Doctor’s bizarre medical experiments. Meanwhile, tempted by the advances of the Drum Major she has been admiring, Marie yields to her impulses.
In Marie’s room, Wozzeck asks her about the new earrings she possesses. Unwilling to admit that they were a gift from the Drum Major, she says she found them, and only after Wozzeck’s departure she admits to herself that she feels guilt for the lie. The Captain and the Doctor interrupt their dark conversation to goad Wozzeck about Marie’s behaviour. Wozzeck confronts her, trying to force an admission of infidelity. When he sees her dancing with the Drum Major at the beer garden, he is overcome with rage. Later, the Drum Major mocks Wozzeck and beats him.
Marie reads in the Bible about Mary Magdalene. Later, walking together by a pond, she and Wozzeck reminisce. When she tries to flee his fit of temper, he stabs her. Townspeople see the blood on his hands. He returns to the pond to hide his knife and wash his hands in the water. Passing nearby, the Captain and the Doctor hear him drown. Neighbour children tease Marie’s child about his mother’s death, but he is too young to understand.
