Aleksandr Popov, in full Aleksandr Stepanovich Popov,  (born March 4 [March 16, New Style], 1859, Turinskiye Rudniki [now Krasnoturinsk], Perm, Russia—died  Dec. 31, 1905,  [Jan. 13, 1906], St. Petersburg), physicist and electrical engineer acclaimed in Russia as the inventor of radio. Evidently he built his first primitive radio receiver, a lightning detector (1895), without knowledge of the contemporary work of the Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi. The genuineness and the value of Popov’s successful experiments are not seriously doubted, but Marconi’s priority is usually conceded.
Popov was the son of a village priest. He received his early education in an ecclesiastical seminary school and planned to enter the priesthood. But in 1877 his interests changed to mathematics, and he entered the University of St. Petersburg, from which he was graduated with distinction in 1883. Joining the teaching faculty of the university, he lectured in mathematics and physics in preparation for a professorship.
Popov’s main interest soon changed to electrical engineering, however; and, because Russia in that period lacked colleges that taught the subject, he became an instructor at the Russian Navy’s Torpedo School at Kronstadt (Kronshtadt), near St. Petersburg, where students were trained to take charge of electrical equipment on Russian warships. Popov took advantage of the school’s library, which was stocked with foreign books and periodicals, and also of its well-equipped laboratory to follow scientific developments abroad and carry out experiments. Recognizing the importance of German physicist Heinrich Hertz’s discovery of electromagnetic waves, Popov began to work on methods of receiving them over long distances.
Popov constructed an apparatus that could register atmospheric electrical disturbances and, in July 1895, installed it at the meteorological observatory of the Institute of Forestry in St. Petersburg. In a paper published a few months later, Popov suggested that such an apparatus could be used for the reception of signals from a man-made source of oscillations, provided a sufficient power source became available. On May 7, 1895, he appeared before the St. Petersburg Physicochemical Society and demonstrated the transmission of Hertzian waves—as they were then termed—between different parts of the University of St. Petersburg buildings. Evidence suggests that on that occasion the words “Heinrich Hertz” were transmitted in Morse code and that the aural signals received were transcribed on a blackboard by the society’s president, who was the chairman of the meeting.
During the academic year 1895–96 at the Torpedo School, however, Popov became interested in setting up experiments on Röntgen rays (X rays), which had just been discovered. Therefore, he discontinued for a time the further development of his lightning, or thunderstorm, detector. He then read the first newspaper accounts of Marconi’s demonstrations in September 1896. It seems clear that neither Marconi nor Popov was aware of the close similarity between their experiments.
The news of Marconi’s work, as disclosed in his patent of June 1896, aroused Popov to fresh activity. Working in conjunction with the Russian navy, he effected ship-to-shore communication over a distance of 10 km (6 miles) by 1898. The distance was increased to about 50 km (30 miles) by the end of the following year, during which he had also visited wireless stations in operation in France and Germany.
Popov was given remarkably little support by the Russian government until 50 years later, when national attitudes and enthusiasms had changed. On May 7, 1945, the Bolshoi Theatre was packed with a distinguished audience to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the “invention of the radio” by A.S. Popov. On the stage sat scientists, marshals, admirals, commissars, leaders of the Communist Party, and Popov’s daughter. It was announced that in the future the 7th of May would be celebrated as the day of the radio.
Although it is agreed that Popov’s experimental work in connection with Hertzian waves is deserving of recognition, it has not been generally accepted that radio communication was actually invented by him. Popov’s description of his receiving apparatus, which he published in January 1896, coincides closely with that described in Marconi’s patent claim of June 1896. Popov is credited, however, with being the first to use an antenna in the transmission and reception of radio waves.
In 1901 Popov returned to St. Petersburg as a professor at the electrotechnical institute, of which he was later elected director. He died five years later.
