Peter Armbruster,  (born July 25, 1931, Dachau, Bavaria, Ger.), German physicist who led the discovery of atomic elements 107 through 112.
Armbruster studied physics at the Technical Universities of Stuttgart and Munich (1952–57). He received a doctorate from the Technical University of Munich in 1961. Armbruster then studied fission and the interaction of heavy ions at the Jülich Research Centre (1965–70) before proceeding to a position as senior scientist at the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research GmbH in Darmstadt, Ger., the site of a heavy ion accelerator. There he worked for more than two decades to synthesize superheavy elements, a group of relatively stable elements with atomic numbers (numbers of nuclear protons) around 114 and mass numbers (numbers of nuclear protons and neutrons) around 298. He also served as research director (1989–92) of the Institut Laue-Langevin in Grenoble, France.
Scientists had begun creating new elements with atomic numbers higher than that of uranium, element 92, in the early 1940s. As they attempted to make elements heavier than fermium, element 100, the extreme instability of those elements posed increasing challenges. In response, Armbruster and physicists at other accelerators around the world developed more-sophisticated synthetic techniques. At GSI the approaches proved quite successful. In the early 1980s Armbruster and coworkers produced bohrium, hassium, and meitnerium, atomic elements numbered 107 through 109 on the periodic table. In 1994, within a two-month period, they created darmstadtium and roentgenium, elements 110 and 111 on the periodic table, respectively.
On Feb. 9, 1996, Armbruster and his multinational team of scientists at GSI synthesized element 112. Element 112, with an atomic mass of 277, was the heaviest element yet to be produced in the laboratory. It was created from the fusion of the nuclei of lead and zinc, which was achieved using a heavy-ion accelerator to give the zinc enough kinetic energy to smash into the nucleus of a waiting lead target. The two nuclei combined, and element 112 was born. Only one atom of the element was detected in the experiment, and in less than a thousandth of a second it decayed. In spite of its short life span, the new element was expected to provide insight into the nature of nuclear structures.
The synthesis of increasingly heavy elements allowed physicists to test predictions about the stability of atomic nuclei. Scientists had identified certain “magic” numbers of protons and neutrons that should confer particular stability to a nucleus. The stability arises because the internal nuclear structure can arrange itself such that the binding energy of the nucleus is increased. Element 112 has 161 neutrons in its nucleus, which is only one short of the predicted magic number of 162 neutrons.
In 1996 Armbruster joined a project at GSI aimed at developing applications for spallation reactions. His team studied spallation reactions at an energy of 1 GeV (GeV = giga electron volts = 1 billion electron volts) and analyzed the potential of such reactions in the production of energy as well as in Accelerator-Driven Systems (ADS), which could be used to dispose of nuclear waste.
