Alum,  any of a group of hydrated double salts, usually consisting of aluminum sulfate, water of hydration, and the sulfate of another element. A whole series of hydrated double salts results from the hydration of the sulfate of a singly charged cation (e.g., K+) and the sulfate of any one of a number of triply charged cations (e.g., Al3+). Aluminum sulfate can thus form alums with sulfates of the singly charged cations of potassium, sodium, ammonium, cesium, and other elements and compounds. In similar fashion, sulfates of the triply charged cations of iron, chromium, manganese, cobalt, and other metals may take the place of aluminum sulfate. The most important alums are potassium aluminum sulfate, ammonium aluminum sulfate, and sodium aluminum sulfate. Potassium aluminum sulfate, also known as potassium alum or potash alum, has a molecular formula of K2(SO4)·Al2(SO4)3·24H2O or KAl(SO4)2·12H2O.
Alums can easily be produced by precipitation from an aqueous solution. In producing potassium alum, for example, aluminum sulfate and potassium sulfate are dissolved in water, and then upon evaporation the alum crystallizes out of the solution. A more common production method is to treat bauxite ore with sulfuric acid and then with potassium sulfate. Ammonium alum is produced by the evaporation of a water solution containing ammonium sulfate and aluminum sulfate. It can also be obtained by treating a mixture of aluminum sulfate and sulfuric acid with ammonia. Alums occur naturally in various minerals. Potassium alum, for example, is found in the minerals kalinite, alunite, and leucite, which can be treated with sulfuric acid to obtain crystals of the alum.
Most alums have an astringent and acid taste. They are colourless, odourless, and exist as a white crystalline powder. Alums are generally soluble in hot water, and they can be readily precipitated from aqueous solutions to form large octahedral crystals.
Alums have many uses, but they have been partly supplanted by aluminum sulfate itself, which is easily obtainable by treating bauxite ore with sulfuric acid. The commercial uses of alums mainly stem from the hydrolysis of the aluminum ions, which results in the precipitation of aluminum hydroxide. This chemical has various industrial uses. Paper is sized, for example, by depositing aluminum hydroxide in the interstices of the cellulose fibres. Aluminum hydroxide adsorbs suspended particles from water and is thus a useful flocculating agent in water-purification plants. When used as a mordant (binder) in dyeing, it fixes dye to cotton and other fabrics, rendering the dye insoluble. Alums are also used in pickling, in baking powder, in fire extinguishers, and as astringents in medicine.
