Archaefructus,  extinct genus of aquatic flowering plants (angiosperms) from northeastern China dated to the Early Cretaceous Epoch (145 million to 100 million years ago). The genus includes three described species: Archaefructus eoflora, A. liaoningensis, and A. sinensis. The fossils come from lacustrine (lake and pond) deposits of the Yixian Formation, which also preserves some of China’s famous feathered dinosaurs, early birds, mammals, and a wide range of plants. The first report of Archaefructus suggested that it emerged during the Jurassic Period (200 million to 146 million years ago), which would have made it the oldest undisputed fossil of a flowering plant. However, later work confirmed that the specimen was dated to about 125 million years ago, a time on par with other reports of early flowering plants.
Although no longer considered the oldest flowering plant, Archaefructus remains significant because specimens are preserved complete with roots, shoots, leaves, flowers, and seeds. Seldom is a fossil plant known in such detail. The herbaceous shoots of Archaefructus were generally less than 50 cm (20 inches) tall. A. liaoningensis and A. sinensis had two types of flowers, one bearing pollen and one bearing ovules. In contrast, A. eoflora was bisexual. The leaves of Archaefructus are lacy, a feature typical of some modern aquatic plants.
The team of Chinese and American paleobotanists who initially described Archaefructus regarded it as a new major lineage that represented the ancestral morphology and ecology of flowering plants. Others have since questioned this interpretation, suggesting that it is closely related to the modern water lilies and far removed from the origin of flowers.
An aquatic plant, Archaefructus is thus an unlikely candidate for the first flower. Many land plant lineages have returned to the water, including some ferns, sea grasses, and Isoëtes, a member of the spore-bearing lycopsid lineage whose ancestors dominated Pennsylvanian-age forests some 300 million years ago. However, no aquatic lineages arising from land plants have moved back onto the land and given rise to significant diversity. This is likely because the specializations needed for an aquatic lifestyle limit the evolutionary potential of a lineage if it returns to land.
