Cenozoic Era,  third of the major eras of Earth’s history, beginning about 66 million years ago and extending to the present. It was the interval of time during which the continents assumed their modern configuration and geographic positions and during which Earth’s flora and fauna evolved toward those of the present.
The term Cenozoic, originally spelled Kainozoic, was introduced by English geologist John Phillips in an 1840 Penny Cyclopaedia article to designate the most recent of the three major subdivisions of the Phanerozoic Eon. Derived from the Greek for recent life, it reflects the sequential development and diversification of life on Earth from the Paleozoic (ancient life) through the Mesozoic (middle life). Today, the Cenozoic is internationally accepted as the youngest of the three subdivisions of the fossiliferous part of Earth history.
The Cenozoic Era is generally divided into three periods: the Paleogene (66 million to 23 million years ago), the Neogene (23 million to 2.6 million years ago), and the Quaternary (2.6 million years ago to the present); however, the era has been traditionally divided into the Tertiary and Quaternary periods. The designations Tertiary and Quaternary, however, are relics of early attempts in the late 18th century at formulating a stratigraphic classification that included the now wholly obsolete terms Primary and Secondary. In 1856 Austrian geologist Moritz Hörnes introduced the terms Paleogene and Neogene, the latter encompassing rocks equivalent to those described by Scottish geologist Charles Lyell as Miocene and older and newer Pliocene (which included what he later called the Pleistocene). Subsequent investigators have determined that the designation Neogene correctly applies to the rock systems and corresponding time intervals delineated by Lyell, though some authorities prefer to exclude the Pleistocene from the Neogene. The Paleogene encompasses the Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene epochs. (The terms Paleocene and Oligocene were coined subsequent to Lyell’s work and inserted in the lower part of the Cenozoic stratigraphic scheme.) The Neogene spans the Miocene and Pliocene epochs, and the Quaternary includes the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs.
Cenozoic rocks are extensively developed on all the continents, particularly on lowland plains, as, for example, the Gulf and Atlantic coastal plains of North America. They are generally less consolidated than older rocks, although some are indurated (cemented) as a result of high pressure due to deep burial, chemical diagenesis, or high temperature—namely, metamorphism. Sedimentary rocks predominate during the Cenozoic, and more than half the world’s petroleum occurs in such rocks of this age. Igneous rocks are represented by extensive early Cenozoic flood basalts (those of East Greenland and the Deccan trap of India) and the late Cenozoic flood basalts of the Columbia River in Washington, as well as by numerous volcanoes in the circum-Pacific System (the “Ring of Fire”) and ocean island chains such as Hawaii.
Several of the world’s great mountain ranges were built during the Cenozoic. The main Alpine orogeny, which produced the Alps and Carpathians in southern Europe and the Atlas Mountains in northwestern Africa, began roughly between 37 million and 24 million years ago. The Himalayas were formed some time after the Indian Plate collided with the Eurasian Plate. These lofty mountains marked the culmination of the great uplift that occurred during the late Cenozoic when the Indian Plate drove many hundreds of kilometres into the underbelly of Asia. They are the product of the low-angle underthrusting of the northern edge of the Indian Plate under the southern edge of the Eurasian Plate.
From about five million years ago, the Rocky Mountains and adjoining areas were elevated by rapid uplift of the entire region without faulting. This upwarping sharply steepened stream gradients, enabling rivers to achieve greater erosional power. As a result, deep river valleys and canyons, such as the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River in northern Arizona, were cut into broad upwarps of sedimentary rock during late Cenozoic time.
On a global scale the Cenozoic witnessed the further dismemberment of the Northern Hemispheric supercontinent of Laurasia: Greenland and Scandinavia separated during the early Cenozoic about 55 million years ago, and the Norwegian-Greenland Sea emerged, linking the North Atlantic and Arctic oceans. The Atlantic continued to expand while the Pacific experienced a net reduction in size as a result of continued seafloor spreading. The equatorially situated east–west Tethyan seaway linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans was modified significantly in the east during the middle Eocene—about 45 million years ago—by the junction of India with Eurasia, and it was severed into two parts by the confluence of Africa, Arabia, and Eurasia during the early Miocene approximately 18 million years ago. The western part of the Tethys evolved into the Mediterranean Sea not long after it had been cut off from the global ocean system about 6 million to 5 million years ago and had formed evaporite deposits which reach up to several kilometres in thickness in a land-locked basin that may have resembled Death Valley in present-day California. Antarctica remained centred on the South Pole throughout the Cenozoic, but the northern continents converged in a northward direction.
The global climate was much warmer during the early Cenozoic than it is today, and equatorial-to-polar thermal gradients were less than half of what they are at present. Cooling of Earth began about 50 million years ago and, with fluctuations of varying amounts, has continued inexorably to the present interglacial climatic period. It is to be noted that a unique feature of the Cenozoic was the development of glaciation on the Antarctic continent about 35 million years ago and in the Northern Hemisphere between 3 million and 2.5 million years ago. Glaciation left an extensive geologic record on the continents in the form of predominantly unconsolidated tills and glacial moraines, which in North America extend in a line as far south as Kansas, Illinois, Ohio, and Long Island, New York, and on the ocean floor in the form of ice-rafted detritus dropped from calving icebergs.
