Climate classification,  the formalization of systems that recognize, clarify, and simplify climatic similarities and differences between geographic areas in order to enhance the scientific understanding of climates. Such classification schemes rely on efforts that sort and group vast amounts of environmental data to uncover patterns between interacting climatic processes. All such classifications are limited since no two areas are subject to the same physical or biological forces in exactly the same way. The creation of an individual climate scheme follows either a genetic or an empirical approach.
The climate of an area is the synthesis of the environmental conditions (soils, vegetation, weather, etc.) that have prevailed there over a long period of time. This synthesis involves both averages of the climatic elements and measurements of variability (such as extreme values and probabilities). Climate is a complex, abstract concept involving data on all aspects of Earth’s environment. As such, no two localities on Earth may be said to have exactly the same climate.
Nevertheless, it is readily apparent that, over restricted areas of the planet, climates vary within a limited range and that climatic regions are discernible within which some uniformity is apparent in the patterns of climatic elements. Moreover, widely separated areas of the world possess similar climates when the set of geographic relationships occurring in one area parallels that of another. This symmetry and organization of the climatic environment suggests an underlying worldwide regularity and order in the phenomena causing climate (such as patterns of incoming solar radiation, vegetation, soils, winds, temperature, and air masses). Despite the existence of such underlying patterns, the creation of an accurate and useful climate scheme is a daunting task.
First, climate is a multidimensional concept, and it is not an obvious decision as to which of the many observed environmental variables should be selected as the basis of the classification. This choice must be made on a number of grounds, both practical and theoretical. For example, using too many different elements opens up the possibilities that the classification will have too many categories to be readily interpreted and that many of the categories will not correspond to real climates. Moreover, measurements of many of the elements of climate are not available for large areas of the world or have been collected for only a short time. The major exceptions are soil, vegetation, temperature, and precipitation data, which are more extensively available and have been recorded for extended periods of time.
The choice of variables also is determined by the purpose of the classification (such as to account for distribution of natural vegetation, to explain soil formation processes, or to classify climates in terms of human comfort). The variables relevant in the classification will be determined by this purpose, as will the threshold values of the variables chosen to differentiate climatic zones.
A second difficulty results from the generally gradual nature of changes in the climatic elements over Earth’s surface. Except in unusual situations due to mountain ranges or coastlines, temperature, precipitation, and other climatic variables tend to change only slowly over distance. As a result, climate types tend to change imperceptibly as one moves from one locale on Earth’s surface to another. Choosing a set of criteria to distinguish one climatic type from another is thus equivalent to drawing a line on a map to distinguish the climatic region possessing one type from that having the other. While this is in no way different from many other classification decisions that one makes routinely in daily life, it must always be remembered that boundaries between adjacent climatic regions are placed somewhat arbitrarily through regions of continuous, gradual change and that the areas defined within these boundaries are far from homogeneous in terms of their climatic characteristics.
Most classification schemes are intended for global- or continental-scale application and define regions that are major subdivisions of continents hundreds to thousands of kilometres across. These may be termed macroclimates. Not only will there be slow changes (from wet to dry, hot to cold, etc.) across such a region as a result of the geographic gradients of climatic elements over the continent of which the region is a part, but there will exist mesoclimates within these regions associated with climatic processes occurring at a scale of tens to hundreds of kilometres that are created by elevation differences, slope aspect, bodies of water, differences in vegetation cover, urban areas, and the like. Mesoclimates, in turn, may be resolved into numerous microclimates, which occur at scales of less than 0.1 km (0.06 mile), as in the climatic differences between forests, crops, and bare soil, at various depths in a plant canopy, at different depths in the soil, on different sides of a building, and so on.
These limitations notwithstanding, climate classification plays a key role as a means of generalizing the geographic distribution and interactions among climatic elements, of identifying mixes of climatic influences important to various climatically dependent phenomena, of stimulating the search to identify the controlling processes of climate, and, as an educational tool, to show some of the ways in which distant areas of the world are both different from and similar to one’s own home region.
The earliest known climatic classifications were those of Classical Greek times. Such schemes generally divided Earth into latitudinal zones based on the significant parallels of 0°, 23.5°, and 66.5° of latitude (that is, the Equator, the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, and the Arctic and Antarctic circles, respectively) and on the length of day. Modern climate classification has its origins in the mid-19th century, with the first published maps of temperature and precipitation over Earth’s surface, which permitted the development of methods of climate grouping that used both variables simultaneously.
Many different schemes of classifying climate have been devised (more than 100), but all of them may be broadly differentiated as either empiric or genetic methods. This distinction is based on the nature of the data used for classification. Empirical methods make use of observed environmental data, such as temperature, humidity, and precipitation, or simple quantities derived from them (such as evaporation). In contrast, a genetic method classifies climate on the basis of its causal elements, the activity and characteristics of all factors (air masses, circulation systems, fronts, jet streams, solar radiation, topographic effects, and so forth) that give rise to the spatial and temporal patterns of climatic data. Hence, while empirical classifications are largely descriptive of climate, genetic methods are (or should be) explanatory. Unfortunately, genetic schemes, while scientifically more desirable, are inherently more difficult to implement because they do not use simple observations. As a result, such schemes are both less common and less successful overall. Moreover, the regions defined by the two types of classification schemes do not necessarily correspond; in particular, it is not uncommon for similar climatic forms resulting from different climatic processes to be grouped together by many common empirical schemes.
Genetic classifications group climates by their causes. Among such methods, three types may be distinguished: (1) those based on the geographic determinants of climate, (2) those based on the surface energy budget, and (3) those derived from air mass analysis.
In the first class are a number of schemes (largely the work of German climatologists) that categorize climates according to such factors as latitudinal control of temperature, continentality versus ocean-influenced factors, location with respect to pressure and wind belts, and effects of mountains. These classifications all share a common shortcoming: they are qualitative, so that climatic regions are designated in a subjective manner rather than as a result of the application of some rigorous differentiating formula.
An interesting example of a method based on the energy balance of Earth’s surface is the 1970 classification of Werner H. Terjung, an American geographer. His method utilizes data for more than 1,000 locations worldwide on the net solar radiation received at the surface, the available energy for evaporating water, and the available energy for heating the air and subsurface. The annual patterns are classified according to the maximum energy input, the annual range in input, the shape of the annual curve, and the number of months with negative magnitudes (energy deficits). The combination of characteristics for a location is represented by a label consisting of several letters with defined meanings, and regions having similar net radiation climates are mapped.
Probably the most extensively used genetic systems, however, are those that employ air mass concepts. Air masses are large bodies of air that, in principle, possess relatively homogeneous properties of temperature, humidity, etc., in the horizontal. Weather on individual days may be interpreted in terms of these features and their contrasts at fronts.
Two American geographer-climatologists have been most influential in classifications based on air mass. In 1951 Arthur N. Strahler described a qualitative classification based on the combination of air masses present at a given location throughout the year. Some years later (1968 and 1970) John E. Oliver placed this type of classification on a firmer footing by providing a quantitative framework that designated particular air masses and air mass combinations as “dominant,” “subdominant,” or “seasonal” at particular locations. He also provided a means of identifying air masses from diagrams of mean monthly temperature and precipitation plotted on a “thermohyet diagram,” a procedure that obviates the need for less common upper-air data to make the classification.
Most empirical classifications are those that seek to group climates based on one or more aspects of the climate system. While many such phenomena have been used in this way, natural vegetation stands out as one of prime importance. The view held by many climatologists is that natural vegetation functions as a long-term integrator of the climate in a region; the vegetation, in effect, is an instrument for measuring climate in the same way that a thermometer measures temperature. Its preeminence is apparent in the fact that many textbooks and other sources refer to climates using the names of vegetation—for example, rainforest, taiga, and tundra.
Wladimir Köppen, a German botanist-climatologist, developed the most popular (but not the first) of these vegetation-based classifications. His aim was to devise formulas that would define climatic boundaries in such a way as to correspond to those of the vegetation zones that were being mapped for the first time during his lifetime. Köppen published his first scheme in 1900 and a revised version in 1918. He continued to revise his system of classification until his death in 1940. Other climatologists modified portions of Köppen’s procedure on the basis of their experience in various parts of the world.
Köppen’s classification is based on a subdivision of terrestrial climates into five major types, which are represented by the capital letters A, B, C, D, and E. Each of these climate types except for B is defined by temperature criteria. Type B designates climates in which the controlling factor on vegetation is dryness (rather than coldness). Aridity is not a matter of precipitation alone but is defined by the relationship between the precipitation input to the soil in which the plants grow and the evaporative losses. Since evaporation is difficult to evaluate and is not a conventional measurement at meteorological stations, Köppen was forced to substitute a formula that identifies aridity in terms of a temperature-precipitation index (that is, evaporation is assumed to be controlled by temperature). Dry climates are divided into arid (BW) and semiarid (BS) subtypes, and each may be differentiated further by adding a third code, for warm (h) or cold (k).
As noted above, temperature defines the other four major climate types. These are subdivided, with additional letters again used to designate the various subtypes. Type A climates, the warmest, are differentiated on the basis of the seasonality of precipitation: Af (no dry season), Am (short dry season), or Aw (winter dry season). Type E climates, the coldest, are conventionally separated into tundra (ET) and snow/ice climates (EF). The midlatitude C and D climates are given a second letter, f (no dry season) or w (winter dry) or s (summer dry), and a third symbol—a, b, c, or d (the last subclass exists only for D climates)—indicating the warmth of the summer or the coldness of the winter. Although Köppen’s classification did not consider the uniqueness of highland climate regions, the highland climate category, or H climate, is sometimes added to climate classification systems to account for elevations above 1,500 metres (about 4,900 feet). The table gives the specific criteria for the Köppen-Geiger-Pohl system of 1953.
The Köppen classification has been criticized on many grounds. It has been argued that extreme events, such as a periodic drought or an unusual cold spell, are just as significant in controlling vegetation distributions as the mean conditions upon which Köppen’s scheme is based. It also has been pointed out that factors other than those used in the classification, such as sunshine and wind, are important to vegetation. Moreover, it has been contended that natural vegetation can respond only slowly to environmental change, so that the vegetation zones observable today are in part adjusted to past climates. Many critics have drawn attention to the rather poor correspondence between the Köppen zones and the observed vegetation distribution in many areas of the world. In spite of these and other limitations, the Köppen system remains the most popular climatic classification in use today.
A major contribution to climate grouping was made by the American geographer-climatologist C. Warren Thornthwaite in 1931 and 1948. He first used a vegetation-based approach that made use of the derived concepts of temperature efficiency and precipitation effectiveness as a means of specifying atmospheric effects on vegetation. His second classification retained these concepts in the form of a moisture index and a thermal efficiency index but radically changed the classification criteria and rejected the idea of using vegetation as the climatic integrator, attempting instead to classify “rationally” on the basis of the numerical values of these indices. His 1948 scheme is encountered in many climatology texts, but it has not gained as large a following among a wide audience as the Köppen classification system has, perhaps because of its complexity and the large number of climatic regions it defines.
While vegetation-based climate classifications could be regarded as having relevance to human activity through what they may indicate about agricultural potential and natural environment, they cannot give any sense of how human beings would feel within the various climate types. Terjung’s 1966 scheme was an attempt to group climates on the basis of their effects on human comfort. The classification makes use of four physiologically relevant parameters: temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and solar radiation. The first two are combined in a comfort index to express atmospheric conditions in terms perceived as extremely hot, hot, oppressive, warm, comfortable, cool, keen, cold, very cold, extremely cold, and ultra cold. Temperature, wind speed, and solar radiation are combined in a wind effect index expressing the net effect of wind chill (the cooling power of wind on exposed surfaces) and addition of heat to the human body by solar radiation. These indices are combined for different seasons in different ways to express how humans feel in various geographic areas on a yearly basis. Terjung visualized that his classification would find applicability in medical geography, climatological education, tourism, housing, and clothing and as a general analytical tool.
Many other specialized empirical classifications have been devised. For example, there are those that differentiate between types of desert and coastal climates, those that account for different rates of rock weathering or soil formation, and those based on the identification of similar agricultural climates.
