Duricrust,  surface or near-surface of the Earth consisting of a hardened accumulation of silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3), and iron oxide (Fe2O3), in varying proportions. Admixtures of other substances commonly are present and duricrusts may be enriched with oxides of manganese or titanium within restricted areas. Thus, siliceous, ferruginous, and aluminous crusts constitute duricrusts proper. Encrusted layers of calcium carbonate, gypsum, and salt, however, are often considered forms of duricrust.
The term duricrust (Latin durus, “hard”) was first applied in Australia to layered materials at or near the Earth’s surface, such as laterites, bauxites, and quartzites. These crusts are not of themselves landforms but represent the chemical alteration of the upper parts of plains and other features of low relief. In this sense, they are soils of an extreme type.
Two partial classifications use compound names ending in -crete to indicate the kind of cementation, or in -crust, to indicate the basic chemical content. Both classifications are defective, although the working distinction between silcrusts and ferricrusts is useful. A more serviceable classification adapts and extends the nomenclature developed by soil scientists in Africa. The type boundaries that fall within duricrusts proper must be considered transitional.
Representing the end-products of weathering, denudation, and soil formation, duricrusts occur mainly on erosional platforms such as pediments or as cappings and residuals on stream divides. The crusts usually form parts of deep-weathering profiles that may be as thick as 120 metres (400 feet). Alternatively, they occur at the bases of cliffs and scarps, in river terraces, or on valley bottoms, usually near to and lower than residual cappings. Except at the wasting or developing edges of crusts, the thickness ranges from about 0.5 metre to at least 12 metres. This contrasts with the platelike weathering rinds as thick as 15 centimetres (6 inches) that are often associated with cavernous (alveolar) weathering, particularly in arid areas.
Duricrusts are concentrated in intertropical to subtropical areas, with notable extratropical extensions, especially in South Africa and Australia. They normally are absent from equatorial rain forests. Many are fossil crusts, in the sense that they relate to past climatic, biologic, and geomorphic environments and are not forming under present conditions in these areas.
Other types of crust are associated with subhumid to arid climates, although not necessarily with the arid climatic zones of today. Crusts of calcium carbonate (calccrusts) and calcium sulfate (gypcrusts), up to 4 m thick occur in basins of inland drainage, where they form initially as evaporites (see evaporite). Alternatively, calccrusts form as surface to subsurface soil horizons, or zones, at and near the extreme end of the calcium-rich soil range. Gypsum-rich horizons, common in many desert and semidesert soils, seem not resistant enough to erosion to become crusts. Calcsilitic crusts, which result from the silification of calccrusts or other surficial limestones, have been little studied in this context. Salcrusts (salt crusts) form in depressions along desert coasts or wherever saline groundwater emerges, but unless they crystallize into rock salt these crusts also lack resistance to erosion and can be ephemeral.
In Australia, India, Africa, and South America, the main expanses of duricrust tend to mantle pediments and plains in varying states of dissection, although some crusts occur in valleys in terrain of high relief. Allitic crusts yield commercial bauxite. Detrital and valley-floor duricrusts occur in all these countries, chiefly adjacent to the margins of residual caps. These crusts include economic reserves of manganese ore in western Africa and silicified terrace gravels in southern Australia. Possible combinations of terrain, weathering, erosion and dissection of duricrusts and continued or renewed duricrust formation are highly complex. Additionally, some duricrusts now lie buried beneath continental (nonmarine) sediments.
Rough limits to present-day ferricrust formation are the 500- to 700-millimetre (20- to 27.5-inch) isohyet (contour of equal rainfall values), below which iron is not readily mobilized, and the 1,200-mm isohyet, above which dehydration is unusual. High mean annual temperatures, on the order of 20° to 25° C (68° to 77° F), also are necessary. Duricrusts that occur beyond the indicated limits are generally fossil (related to former climatic regimes), and many within these limits also are fossil. Ages determined by stratigraphic or radiometric methods are as great as 50,000,000 years in western Africa and more than 23,000,000 years in Australia, but duricrust formation is occurring today in some places. Phenomena related to fossil crusts include the deep weathering of the southern Piedmont area of the United States and of massifs in western and northwestern Europe during the Paleogene and Neogene periods (between 65.5 million and 2.6 million years ago), and the early Cenozoic formation of residual bauxite at latitude 65° N in Siberia.
The formation of crusts involves great loss of weathered material. A generalized example from the tropical weathering of a nepheline syenite (intrusive igneous rock) shows a reduction of silica (SiO2) from 55 percent in the fresh rock to 5 percent in the duricrust, but an increase of alumina (Al2O3) from 1 percent to 45 percent, of iron oxide (Fe2O3) from 5 percent to 23 percent, and of combined water from 1 percent to 25 percent.
The circulation of nutrients between plants and soil in tropical forests involves excess uptake by the plants, and this in turn promotes deep weathering. Within the deep-weathering profile, silt-size material is broken down or leached out. Clay minerals tend to be dispersed and moved downward, especially where high rainfall and vigorous plant growth lower the electrolyte concentration. The remaining oxides tend to aggregate into forms in which spheroidal microstructures are common.
Mechanisms that are capable of promoting dehydration and hardening of ferricrusts, whether before, during, or after stripping of the overlying soil, include the destruction of forest and lowering of the water table, both of which can occur in several ways. Aside from clearance by humans, forest destruction, for example, may be caused by climatic change and downcutting by fluvial processes.
Silcrust formation requires the selective concentration of silica, a fact that has led some experts to consider silcrusts as the lower parts of ferricrust profiles. The distributional contrast between silcrusts and ferricrusts is clear, however, and the transition between the types is well documented. Silcrusts often, but not invariably, result from the silicification of sandstones and quartzitic conglomerates. They occur in areas that are currently drier than those with ferricrusts, but the fossil nature of many, plus the deep-weathering profiles to which they usually belong, presumably indicate humid climates at the time of formation and inhibit direct reference to existing controls. Like ferricrusts, silcrusts are usually taken to have originated below the ground surface, possibly under a layer of erodible, fine material.
