Edmund Ruffin,  (born Jan. 5, 1794, Prince George County, Va., U.S.—died  June 18, 1865, Amelia County, Va.), the father of soil chemistry in the United States, who showed how to restore fertility to depleted Southeast plantations. He was also a leading secessionist for decades prior to the U.S. Civil War.
Born into Virginia’s planter class, Ruffin was largely educated at home. In 1813 he took over management of his recently deceased father’s tobacco plantation. Like other tidewater farmlands, it had declined greatly in productivity owing to single-crop agriculture, overuse, and poor farming methods. Though lacking any background in scientific agriculture, Ruffin set about investigating the causes and cures of soil depletion. He found that Southern soils had become so acid that they could not retain fertilizers.
In 1818 Ruffin presented a paper—later (1821) expanded into an article for American Farmer and eventually into a highly influential book, An Essay on Calcareous Manures (1832)—in which he explained how applications of calcareous earths (marl) reduced soil acidity. Even more persuasive were Ruffin’s enhanced yields of corn and wheat on lands fertilized, plowed, planted, rotated, and drained according to his instructions.
From 1833 to 1842 Ruffin published and largely wrote an agricultural journal, the Farmer’s Register. He became the president of the Virginia State Agricultural Society in 1852. Throughout the 1820s, 1830s, and 1840s, he wrote numerous articles and pamphlets and gave many speeches on the benefits of scientific agriculture in the South.
As the sectional conflict intensified during the 1850s, however, Ruffin turned his attention more and more to defending slavery, largely on racial grounds. In 1857 he published The Political Economy of Slavery, in which he contrasted favourably Southern chattel servitude with Northern free labour. His Anticipations of the Future in 1860 called for secession and predicted a happy and prosperous independent South.
Ruffin fired one of the first shots at Fort Sumter in 1861. During the Civil War he grew increasingly despondent as his long-cherished dreams were crushed by Union military might. Two months after Appomattox, Ruffin wrote a note in which he said, “I cannot survive my country’s liberty,” and then killed himself.
