Eospermatopteris,  genus of extinct plants known from fossil stumps discovered in the 1870s near Gilboa, New York, U.S. Eospermatopteris trunks were discovered upright, as they would have grown in life, and occurred in dense stands in the marshy lowlands near an ancient inland sea. However, only the lowermost 0.5 to 1.5 metres (2 to 5 feet) of Eospermatopteris trunks were preserved, and the plant’s branches and foliage remained unknown for more than 130 years. These fossils have been dated to the Givetian Age (387.7 million to 382.7 million years ago) of the Devonian Period; they are probably the remains of the oldest known trees, which made up the world’s first terrestrial forests.
The height, form, and evolutionary relationships of these plants remained enigmatic until a second source of material came to light from a quarry about 13 km (8 miles) from the uppermost Eospermatopteris stump site. The second group of fossils, described in 2007, preserve nearly complete Eospermatopteris plants that were approximately 8 metres (about 26 feet) tall. The slender trunk was topped with at least eight branches that spread out from the apex like outstretched fingers. The plant did not have flattened leaves; instead, its branches were covered in whorls of forked branchlets. Branch tips similar to those discovered at the second site had been found in rocks in Belgium and Venezuela dated to Middle and Late Devonian times (some 393.3 million to 358.9 million years ago) and were given the name Wattieza; however, they clearly belong to the same plant. Eospermatopteris/Wattieza reproduced by spores, similar to modern ferns, horsetails, and club mosses. The plant belongs to an extinct plant group, the Cladoxylopsida, which are interpreted to be intermediate between early land plants and the lineage that includes ferns and horsetails.
Just below the plant’s crown was a region of the trunk showing scars where older branches had been shed. The height of the stem and the density of these scars suggest that the tree produced an abundance of litter during its lifetime. This mode of growth may have had significant consequences for global carbon budgets by locking atmospheric carbon dioxide into both living and dead biomass on land. In addition, the abundance of plant litter in these first forests may have facilitated the evolution of a diverse and abundant terrestrial arthropod fauna.
