Fluvial process,   the physical interaction of flowing water and the natural channels of rivers and streams. Such processes play an essential and conspicuous role in the denudation of land surfaces and the transport of rock detritus from higher to lower levels.
Over much of the world the erosion of landscape, including the reduction of mountains and the building of plains, is brought about by the flow of water. As the rain falls and collects in watercourses, the process of erosion not only degrades the land, but the products of erosion themselves become the tools with which the rivers carve the valleys in which they flow. Sediment materials eroded from one location are transported and deposited in another, only to be eroded and redeposited time and again before reaching the ocean. At successive locations, the riverine plain and the river channel itself are products of the interaction of a water channel’s flow with the sediments brought down from the drainage basin above.
The velocity of a river’s flow depends mainly upon the slope and the roughness of its channel. A steeper slope causes higher flow velocity, but a rougher channel decreases it. The slope of a river corresponds approximately to the fall of the country it traverses. Near the source, frequently in hilly regions, the slope is usually steep, but it gradually flattens out, with occasional irregularities, until, in traversing plains along the latter part of the river’s course, it usually becomes quite mild. Accordingly, large streams usually begin as torrents with highly turbulent flow and end as gently flowing rivers.
In floodtime, rivers bring down large quantities of sediment, derived mainly from the disintegration of the surface layers of the hills and valley slopes by rain and from the erosion of the riverbed by flowing water. Glaciers, frost, and wind also contribute to the disintegration of the Earth’s surface and to the supply of sediment to rivers. The power of a river current to transport materials depends to a large extent on its velocity, so that torrents with a rapid fall near the sources of rivers can carry down rocks, boulders, and large stones. These are gradually ground by attrition in their onward course into shingle, gravel, sand, and silt and are carried forward by the main river toward the sea or partially strewn over flat plains during floods. The size of the materials deposited in the bed of the river becomes smaller as the reduction of velocity diminishes the transporting power of the current.
Since the earliest days of modern applied hydraulics, engineering research has attempted to better understand sediment transportation. Because sediment particles are generally heavier than the amount of water they displace, the Archimedes principle could not be used to explain the fact that heavy sediment was capable of being lifted and transported by flowing water. Another explanation was, consequently, required. Twentieth-century research distinguishes, in this connection, between “bed load” on the one hand and “suspended load” on the other. The former is composed of the larger particles, which are either rolled or pushed along the bed of the stream or which “jump,” or saltate, from the crest of one ripple to another if the velocity is sufficiently great. On the other hand, the smaller particles, the suspended sediment once picked up and lifted by the moving water, may remain in suspension for considerable periods of time and thus be transported over many kilometres.
