geoengineering,  the large-scale manipulation of a specific process central to controlling Earth’s climate for the purpose of obtaining a specific benefit. Global climate is controlled by the amount of solar radiation received by Earth and also by the fate of this energy within the Earth system—that is, how much is absorbed by Earth’s surface and how much is reflected or reradiated back into space. The reflectance of solar radiation is controlled by several mechanisms, including Earth’s surface albedo and cloud coverage and the presence in the atmosphere of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2). If geoengineering proposals are to influence global climate in any meaningful way, they must intentionally alter the relative influence of one of these controlling mechanisms.
Geoengineering proposals were first developed in the middle of the 20th century. Relying on technologies developed during World War II, such proposals were designed to alter weather systems in order to obtain more favourable climate conditions on a regional scale. One of the best-known techniques is cloud seeding, a process that attempts to bring rain to parched farmland by dispersing particles of silver iodide or solid carbon dioxide into rain-bearing clouds. Cloud seeding has also been used in attempts to weaken tropical storms. In addition, the U.S. military suggested that nuclear weapons might be used as tools to alter regional climates and make certain areas of the world more favourable for human habitation. This proposal, however, was not tested.
Cloud seeding works on a regional scale, seeking to influence weather systems for the benefit of agriculture. Present-day geoengineering proposals have focused on the global scale, particularly as evidence has mounted of increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations and thus the prospect of global warming. Two fundamentally different approaches to the problem of global climate change have arisen. The first approach proposes the use of technologies that would increase the reflectance of incoming solar radiation, thus reducing the heating effect of sunlight upon Earth’s surface and lower atmosphere. However, altering Earth’s heat budget by reflecting more sunlight back into space might offset rising temperatures but would do nothing to counter the rising concentration of CO2 in Earth’s atmosphere. The second geoengineering approach focuses on this problem, proposing to remove CO2 from the air and store it in areas where it cannot interact with Earth’s atmosphere. This approach is more appealing than the first because it has the potential to counteract both rising temperatures and rising carbon dioxide levels. In addition, reducing CO2 in the air could address the problem of ocean acidification. Vast amounts of atmospheric CO2 are taken up by the oceans and mixed with seawater to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). As the amount of carbonic acid rises in the ocean, it lowers the pH of seawater. Such ocean acidification could result in damage to coral reefs and other calcareous organisms such as sea urchins. Reducing the concentration of CO2 would slow and perhaps eventually halt the production of carbonic acid, which in turn would reduce ocean acidification.
To some scientists, global-scale geoengineering proposals border on science fiction. Geoengineering is also controversial because it aims to modify global climate—a phenomenon that is not yet fully understood and cannot be altered without risk. In the popular press there have been reports that view geoengineering as the final option to thwart climate change if all other measures to reduce CO2 emissions fail in the coming decades. Several studies advocate that rigorous testing should precede the implementation of any geoengineering proposal so that unintended consequences would be avoided. Each proposal described below would differ from the others in its potential efficiency, complexity, cost, safety considerations, and unknown effects on the planet, and all of them should be thoroughly evaluated before being implemented. Despite this, no proposed scheme has been purposefully tested, even as a small-scale pilot study, and hence the efficiency, cost, safety, or timescale of any scheme has never been evaluated.
Geoengineering schemes that could increase the reflectance of incoming solar radiation include raising ground-level albedo, injecting sulfur particles into the stratosphere, whitening marine clouds, and delivering millions of tiny orbital mirrors or sunshades into space. It is important to note that a great deal of debate surrounds each of these schemes, and the feasibility of each is difficult to ascertain. Clearly, their deployment at global scales would be difficult and expensive, and small-scale trials would reveal little about their potential effectiveness.
Raising the albedo (surface reflectance) of a material has been shown to redirect some of the energy that otherwise would be absorbed. At regional scales, the greatest changes in albedo have been shown to occur in areas undergoing desertification and deforestation, where the green surfaces of forests and grasslands (which reflect relatively small amounts of incoming sunlight) are replaced with the tan and gray surfaces of deserts and sandy soils (which reflect a greater amount). Some scientists note that increasing the albedo of Arctic sea ice could mitigate the ongoing problem of declining sea-ice coverage. They suggest that using aircraft to scatter pulverized glass or tiny hollow glass beads across the sea ice could increase the amount of reflected incoming radiation in the region from 60–70 percent to 90 percent.
The formation of an aerosol layer of sulfur in the stratosphere would increase the scattering of incoming solar radiation. As more radiation is scattered in the stratosphere by aerosols, less would be absorbed by the troposphere, the lower level of the atmosphere where weather primarily occurs. Proponents believe that sulfur injection essentially would mimic the atmospheric effects that follow volcanic eruptions. The 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, often cited as the inspiration of this proposal, deposited massive amounts of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide (SO2) into the atmosphere. This aerosol layer was reported to have lowered average temperatures around the world by about 0.5 °C (0.9 °F) over the following few years. To produce an artificial aerosol layer, sulfur particles would be shot into the stratosphere by cannons or dispersed from balloons or other aircraft.
The process of cloud whitening relies upon towering spraying devices placed on land and mounted on oceangoing vessels. Such devices would expel a mist of pressurized seawater droplets and dissolved salts to altitudes up to 300 metres (1,000 feet). As the water droplets evaporate, proponents believe, bright salt crystals would remain to reflect incoming solar radiation. Later these crystals would act as condensation nuclei and form new water droplets, which in turn would increase overall marine cloud coverage, reflecting even more incoming solar radiation into space.
This proposal involves the placement of several million small reflective objects beyond Earth’s atmosphere. It is thought that concentrated clusters of these objects could partially redirect or block incoming solar radiation. The objects would be launched from rockets and positioned at a stable Lagrangian point between the Sun and Earth. (Lagrangian points are locations in space at which a small body, under the gravitational influence of two large ones, will remain approximately at rest relative to them.) The premise is that as inbound solar radiation declines, there would be less energy available to heat Earth’s lower atmosphere. Thus, average global air temperatures would fall.
