Halide mineral,   any of a group of naturally occurring inorganic compounds that are salts of the halogen acids (e.g., hydrochloric acid). Such compounds, with the notable exceptions of halite (rock salt), sylvite, and fluorite, are rare and of very local occurrence.
Compositionally and structurally, three broad categories of halide minerals are recognized; these categories, which are also distinguishable in their modes of occurrence, include the simple halides, the halide complexes, and the oxyhydroxy-halides.
The simple halides are salts of the alkali, alkaline earth, and transition metals. Most are soluble in water; the transition-metal halides are unstable under exposure to air. Halite, sodium chloride (NaCl), is the most familiar example; it often occurs with other evaporite minerals in enormous beds resulting from the accumulation of brines and trapped oceanic water in impermeable basins and their evaporation. Minor amounts of sylvite, potassium chloride (KCl), also are present in such beds.
Fluorite, or calcium fluoride (CaF2), another simple halide, is found in limestones that have been permeated by aqueous solutions containing the fluoride anion. Noteworthy deposits of fluorite occur in Mexico; Cumberland, Eng.; and Illinois, Missouri, Kentucky, and Colorado in the United States.
Other simple halides such as sal-ammoniac, ammonium chloride (NH4Cl); lawrencite, ferrous chloride (FeCl2); and molysite, ferric chloride (FeCl3) occur in fumarolic vents and are highly unstable in air. A few hydrothermal vein minerals in silver deposits, such as chlorargyrite and calomel, serve as minor and occasional ores of silver and mercury, respectively. A few double salts (e.g., carnallite and tachyhydrite) included among the simple halides have formed under conditions similar to the formation of halite.
In the halide complexes, halide anions are tightly bound to a cation, usually aluminum; the resulting unit behaves as a single negative ion. The most common examples are the fluoroaluminates cryolite, cryolithionite, thomsenolite, and weberite. Enormous quantities of cryolite formerly were mined at Ivigtut, Greenland, to be used for flux in the recovery of aluminum from bauxite.
Most oxyhydroxy-halides are rare and highly insoluble compounds. Many have formed by the action of halide-bearing waters upon the oxidation products of previously existing sulfides; atacamite, matlockite, nadorite, and diaboleite are examples. A few compounds such as a fiedlerite, laurionite, and penfieldite have formed through the action of seawater upon ancient lead slags from the historic deposits at Laurium, Greece.
