Hydrology,  scientific discipline concerned with the waters of the Earth, including their occurrence, distribution, and circulation via the hydrologic cycle and interactions with living things. It also deals with the chemical and physical properties of water in all its phases.
A brief treatment of hydrology follows. For full treatment, see hydrologic sciences.
Hydrology has as its primary objective the study of the interrelationship between water and its environment. As hydrology is mainly concerned with water close to the land surface, it focuses on those components of the hydrologic cycle that occur there—namely, precipitation, evapotranspiration, runoff, and groundwater. Its various subdisciplines deal with different aspects of these phenomena. Hydrometeorology, for example, concentrates on water in the lower boundary layer of the atmosphere, while hydrometry involves the measurement of surface water, especially precipitation and streamflow. Hydrography entails the description and mapping of large bodies of surface water, such as lakes, inland seas, and oceans. On the other hand, groundwater hydrology centres on subsurface water in the saturated zone, and soil-water physics on that in the unsaturated zone.
Hydrology draws upon the disciplines of geology, chemistry, soil science, and plant physiology, employing many of their principles and methods. Researchers in the field rely increasingly on computer simulations of natural hydrologic systems and remote-sensing techniques, as, for example, the use of Earth-orbiting satellites equipped with infrared cameras to detect bodies of polluted water or to trace the flow of hot springs.
Hydrologic research is important in the development, management, and control of water resources. Its applications are manifold and include irrigation-systems development, flood and land-erosion control, waste-water disposal and treatment, pollution abatement, recreational use of water, fish and wildlife preservation, hydropower generation, and the design of hydraulic structures.
