Law of faunal succession,  observation that assemblages of fossil plants and animals follow or succeed each other in time in a predictable manner, even when found in different places. Sequences of successive strata and their corresponding enclosed faunas have been matched together to form a composite section detailing Earth’s history, especially from the inception of the Cambrian Period, which began about 541 million years ago. The concept was derived from an 1812 study of the marine invertebrate and terrestrial vertebrate fauna of the Paris Basin by the French zoologist Georges Cuvier.
Because members of faunas can be distinguished from one another through time and because of the wide geographic distribution of organisms on Earth, strata from different geographic areas can be correlated with each other and dated. Faunal succession is the fundamental tool of stratigraphy and comprises the basis for the geologic time scale. Climate and conditions throughout Earth’s history can be studied using the successive groups of plants and animals because they reflect their environment.
Cuvier noted that many fossils, particularly those of terrestrial vertebrates, had no living counterparts when viewed in the context of the succession of rock strata with which they were associated. He observed that more advanced but related forms appeared to be separated from each other by breaks in the rock record, which suggested that catastrophic events produced extinctions and subsequent periods of biological renewal. The notion that faunal succession had occurred because evolution generally progresses from simple to complex in a nonrepetitive and orderly manner was reinforced by the work of British civil engineer William Smith. (Modern evolutionary biologists, however, are quick to point out that later forms of life need not be more complex than their direct ancestors to succeed and survive in a changing environment, and thus they argue that evolutionary progress is not necessarily dependent on increasing biological complexity.)
