Louis-Antoine de Bougainville,   (born Nov. 11, 1729, Paris—died  Aug. 31, 1811, Paris), French navigator who explored areas of the South Pacific as leader of the French naval force that first sailed around the world (1766–69). His widely read account, Voyage autour du monde (1771; A Voyage Round the World, 1772), helped popularize a belief in the moral worth of man in his natural state, a concept of considerable significance in the French thought of his day.
Entering the army at age 24, Bougainville went to Canada (1756) as aide-de-camp to Gen. Louis-Joseph de Montcalm and distinguished himself against the British in the French and Indian War. Having left the army for the navy in 1763, he voyaged the next year into the Atlantic near the tip of South America to establish a colony for France in the Falkland Islands. The colony was ceded to Spain in 1767.
Commissioned by the French government to circle the Earth in a voyage of exploration, Bougainville put to sea in December 1766, accompanied by naturalists and other scientists. After passing through the Strait of Magellan, he went northwest through the South Pacific and visited Tahiti. Sailing west, he touched Samoa and the New Hebrides and then continued west into waters not previously navigated by any European ship. He proved that Espiritu Santo was an island and not part of the rumoured southern continent of Terra Australis Incognita. On the fringes of the Great Barrier Reef, he turned north without sighting Australia, passed the edge of the Solomon Islands, and went on to New Britain. Because his men were by then suffering from scurvy, and the ships needed refitting, he stopped at Buru in the Moluccas (September 1768) and at Batavia (now Jakarta) in Java. He returned to Saint-Malo, in Brittany, in March 1769, having lost seven men.
Bougainville became secretary to Louis XV (1772) and served as chef d’escadre (commodore) in operations of the French fleet off North America (1779–82) in support of the American Revolution. After a French defeat off Martinique (April 12, 1782), he was court-martialled. During the French Revolution, he escaped the massacres of Paris in 1792 and settled on his estate in Normandy. Napoleon I made him a senator, count, and member of the Legion of Honour. Named for him are the largest of the Solomon Islands, a strait in the New Hebrides group, and the plant genus Bougainvillea.
