Marcia McNutt, in full Marcia Kemper McNutt,  (born February 19, 1952, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.), American geophysicist who was the first woman to direct the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS; 2009–13) and the first woman elected to serve as president of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS; 2016– ). McNutt was known for her leadership skills and for her contributions to marine geophysics, in which she applied a diverse array of technologies to better understand ocean basin development and the structure of the oceanic lithosphere.
In 1970 McNutt graduated as valedictorian of her high-school class at Northrop Collegiate School (later the Blake School) in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She subsequently attended Colorado College, completing a bachelor’s degree in physics in 1973, and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, earning a Ph.D. in Earth sciences in 1978. The following year, McNutt joined the USGS, working as a geophysicist in Menlo Park, California. In 1982 she accepted a position at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). There her studies focused on understanding the dynamics of Earth’s upper mantle in the South Pacific Ocean and on understanding the geophysics of the Plateau of Tibet. She later was named Griswold Professor of Geophysics at MIT.
In 1997 McNutt joined the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) in California, becoming its president and chief executive officer. She continued to investigate the physical properties of swells (broad regions of shallow seafloor), including an unusually large superswell in the South Pacific Ocean that had been producing volcanoes in island chains for tens of millions of years. While leading MBARI, McNutt also served as a professor at Stanford University and the University of California, Santa Cruz. In 2009 she left the institute, having been elected to serve as president of the USGS and as a science adviser to the secretary of the interior.
During McNutt’s tenure with the USGS, she helped lead the organization’s response to several major natural disasters, including the Haiti earthquake of 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, and Superstorm Sandy. In response to the Deepwater Horizon spill, McNutt organized the Flow Rate Technical Group, a team of scientists tasked with estimating the rate at which oil was leaking into the Gulf of Mexico from a well in the seafloor that had been damaged by an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig, which was owned and operated by the oil company BP. The group’s findings played a key role in the decision by the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling to attribute responsibility for the spill to BP rather than to a faulty response by the government.
In 2013, after overseeing the launch of the U.S. scientific satellite Landsat 8, McNutt resigned from her government post. Later that year, she became the first female editor in chief of Science magazine, the flagship publication of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In that role, she worked to expand the magazine’s science communication efforts, launching a new publication, Science Advances—the association’s first open-access journal. In February 2016 McNutt was elected president of the NAS.
McNutt received numerous honours and awards during her career, including the Maurice Ewing Medal (2007), awarded by the American Geophysical Union, an organization for which she had earlier served as president (2000–02). McNutt was an elected member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1999) and the NAS (2005).
