Pegmatite,  almost any wholly crystalline igneous rock that is at least in part very coarse grained, the major constituents of which include minerals typically found in ordinary igneous rocks and in which extreme textural variations, especially in grain size, are characteristic. Giant crystals, with dimensions measured in metres, occur in some pegmatites, but the average grain size of all such rocks is only 8 to 10 cm (3 to 4 inches).
Most bodies of pegmatite are tabular, podlike (cigar-shaped), or irregular in form and range in size from single crystals of feldspar to dikes (tabular bodies injected in fissures) many tens of metres thick and more than a kilometre long; many are intimately associated with masses of fine-grained aplite. Pegmatites occur in all parts of the world and are most abundant in rocks of relatively great geologic age. Some are segregations within much larger bodies of intrusive igneous rocks, others are distributed in the rocks that surround such bodies, and still others are not recognizably associated with igneous rocks.
Granitic and syenitic pegmatite deposits are the chief source of commercial feldspar, sheet mica, and beryllium, tantalum–niobium, and lithium minerals. They also yield significant quantities of gem minerals, mica, molybdenite, cassiterite, tungsten minerals, rare-earth minerals, and certain types of kaolin, either directly or as the sources of placer deposits. Economic lode concentrations generally occur in zoned pegmatite bodies (i.e., those within which two or more different rock types are systematically disposed).
Pegmatites are little different from the common igneous rocks in major elements of bulk composition, and they range from felsic to mafic (silica-rich to silica-poor); granitic and syenitic types are most abundant. Quartz and alkali feldspars are the essential constituents; the most common varietal and accessory minerals are muscovite, biotite, apatite, garnet, and tourmaline. Many granitic pegmatites contain unusual concentrations of the less-abundant elements. Ore minerals, chiefly sulfides and oxides, are widespread in pegmatites but rarely are abundant.
