Richter scale (ML),  quantitative measure of an earthquake’s magnitude (size), devised in 1935 by American seismologists Charles F. Richter and Beno Gutenberg. The earthquake’s magnitude is determined using the logarithm of the amplitude (height) of the largest seismic wave calibrated to a scale by a seismograph. Although modern scientific practice has replaced the original Richter scale with other, more-accurate scales, the Richter scale is still often mentioned erroneously in news reports of earthquake severity as the catch-all name for the logarithmic scale upon which earthquakes are measured.
The Richter scale was originally devised to measure the magnitude of earthquakes of moderate size (that is, magnitude 3 to magnitude 7) by assigning a number that would allow the size of one earthquake to be compared with another. The scale was developed for temblors occuring in southern California that were recorded using the Wood-Anderson seismograph and whose epicentres were less than 600 km (373 miles) from the location of the seismograph. Present-day seismographs, however, may be calibrated to compute Richter magnitudes, and modern methods for measuring earthquake magnitude have been developed to produce results that remain consistent with those measured using the Richter scale.
On the original Richter scale, the smallest earthquakes measurable at that time were assigned values close to zero on the seismograph of the period. Since modern seismographs can detect seismic waves even smaller than those originally chosen for zero magnitude, it is possible to measure earthquakes having negative magnitudes on the Richter scale. Each increase of one unit on the scale represents a 10-fold increase in the magnitude of an earthquake. In other words, numbers on the Richter scale are proportional to the common (base 10) logarithms of maximum wave amplitudes. Each increase of one unit also represents the release of about 31 times more energy than that represented by the previous whole number on the scale. (That is, an earthquake measuring 5.0 releases 31 times more energy than an earthquake measuring 4.0.) In theory, the Richter scale has no upper limit, but, in practice, no earthquake has ever been registered on the scale above magnitude 8.6. (That was the Richter magnitude for the Chile earthquake of 1960. The moment magnitude for this event was measured at 9.5.).
For earthquakes measuring magnitude 6.5 or greater, Richter’s original methodology has been shown to be unreliable. Magnitude calculations are dependent on the earthquake being local, as well as on the use of one particular type of seismograph. In addition, the Richter scale could not be used to calculate the total energy released by an earthquake or describe the amount of damage it did. Because of limitations imposed by seismographs and the emphasis on measuring a single peak amplitude, the Richter scale underestimates the energy released in earthquakes with magnitudes greater than 6.5, since the values calculated after measuring very large seismic waves tend to cluster, or “saturate,” near one another.
The shortcomings inherent in the original Richter scale spawned the development of improved Richter scales by Richter and Gutenberg. In the decades that followed the creation of the original Richter scale, they developed the body-wave magnitude scale (mb, which calculates the magnitude of primary, or P, and secondary, or S, seismic waves traveling within Earth) and the surface-wave magnitude scale (MS, which calculates the magnitude of Love and Rayleigh waves traveling along Earth’s surface). Although both scales continued to make use of seismographs and peak wave amplitudes, they became relatively reliable ways to calculate the energy of all but the largest earthquakes. The surface-wave magnitude scale also had no distance restrictions between the earthquake epicentre and the location of the seismograph, and the body-wave magnitude scale, with its approximately 1,000-km (620-mile) range, was viewed as accurate enough to measure the few relatively small earthquakes that occurred in eastern North America. Both scales, however, suffered from saturation when used to measure earthquakes of magnitude 8 and above.
The moment magnitude (MW or M) scale, developed in the late 1970s by Japanese seismologist Hiroo Kanamori and American seismologist Thomas C. Hanks, became the most popular measure of earthquake magnitude worldwide during the late 20th and early 21st centuries. It was designed to produce a more-accurate measure of the total energy released by an earthquake. The scale abandoned the use of peak wave amplitudes in its calculations, focusing instead on calculating an earthquake’s seismic moment (M0)—that is, the displacement of the fault across its entire surface multiplied by the force used to move the fault. Since the moment magnitude scale was not limited by Richter’s process, it avoided the saturation problem and thus was used to determine the magnitudes of the largest earthquakes. Moment magnitude calculations, however, continue to express earthquake magnitude using a logarithmic scale, which allows its results to compare favorably with those of other scales below magnitude 8.
The Richter scale of earthquake magnitude is listed in the table.
