San Francisco earthquake of 1906,  major earthquake with a magnitude of 7.9 that occurred on April 18, 1906, at 5:12 am off the northern California coast. The San Andreas Fault slipped along a segment about 270 miles (430 km) long, extending from San Juan Bautista in San Benito county to Humboldt county and from there perhaps out under the sea to an unknown distance. The shaking was felt from Los Angeles in the south to Coos Bay, Oregon, in the north. Damage was severe in San Francisco and in other towns situated near the fault, including San Jose, Salinas, and Santa Rosa.
San Francisco had experienced earthquakes in 1864, 1898, and 1900 but nothing like the 1906 event. Just after 5:00 am on April 18, a noise "like the roar of 10,000 lions" rose as the entire city began to tremble and shake. Cable cars abruptly stopped, City Hall crumbled, and the Palace Hotel’s glass roof splintered and littered the courtyard below.
The quake was followed by a massive fire that swept from the business section near Montgomery Street and the South of Market district toward Russian Hill, Chinatown, North Beach, and Telegraph Hill. The blaze continued for four days, until its smouldering ashes were ultimately extinguished by rain. In the process, more than 500 blocks in the city centre—covering some 4 square miles (10 square km)—were leveled. The inferno destroyed some 28,000 buildings, and the total property value loss was estimated at $350 million.
Some 700 people originally were thought to have died in the disaster, but the death toll is now believed to have exceeded 3,000. Moreover, about 250,000 were left homeless; survivors camped in Golden Gate Park and dunes west of the city or fled to outlying towns. Within a short time, relief shipments of food and clothing reached the city, and several tens of millions of dollars in financial aid arrived from foreign sources, including Europe, Japan and China, and other parts of the Americas. Although insurance payments in the neighbourhood of $300 million were forthcoming, the long task of reconstruction was sustained by local courage and persistence.
Much of the city was rebuilt to be earthquake- and fire-resistant. New plans for civic development made headway as the debris of the old city vanished. In 1915 San Francisco invited the world to see the results of its efforts at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition.
Geologic field studies of this earthquake led to the detailed formation of the theory that elastic rebound of strained faults causes the shaking associated with earthquakes. See also uplift; Harry Fielding Reid.
