Silica mineral,  any of the forms of silicon dioxide (SiO2), including quartz, tridymite, cristobalite, coesite, stishovite, lechatelierite, and chalcedony. Various kinds of silica minerals have been produced synthetically; one is keatite.
Silica minerals make up approximately 26 percent of Earth’s crust by weight and are second only to the feldspars in mineral abundance. Free silica occurs in many crystalline forms with a composition very close to that of silicon dioxide, 46.75 percent by weight being silicon and 53.25 percent oxygen. Quartz is by far the most commonly occurring form. Tridymite, cristobalite, and the hydrous silica mineral opal are uncommon, and vitreous (glassy) silica, coesite, and stishovite have been reported from only a few localities. Several other forms have been produced in the laboratory but have not been found in nature.
The crystallographic structures of the silica minerals, except stishovite, are three-dimensional arrays of linked tetrahedrons, each consisting of a silicon atom coordinated by four oxygen atoms. The tetrahedrons are usually quite regular, and the silicon-oxygen bond distances are 1.61 ± 0.02 Å. Principal differences are related to the geometry of the tetrahedral linkages, which may cause small distortions within the silica tetrahedrons. High pressure forces silicon atoms to coordinate with six oxygen atoms, producing nearly regular octahedrons in the stishovite structure.
The silica minerals when pure are colourless and transparent and have a vitreous lustre. They are nonconductors of electricity and are diamagnetic. All are hard and strong and fail by brittle fracture under an imposed stress.
Some important physical properties of the silica minerals are compared in the Table. All except low tridymite and coesite (among the crystalline varieties) have relatively high symmetry. There is a linear relationship between the specific gravity values listed in the Table and the arithmetic mean of the indices of refraction (measures of the velocity of light that is transmitted in different crystallographic directions) for silica minerals composed of linked tetrahedrons. This relationship does not extend to stishovite because it is not made up of silica tetrahedrons. Melanophlogite is notable because it plots below vitreous silica on the graph. The specific gravities of silica minerals are less than those of most of the dark-coloured silicate minerals associated with them in nature; in general, the lighter-coloured rocks have lower specific gravity for this reason. Silica minerals are insoluble to sparingly soluble in strong acids except hydrofluoric acid, in which there is a correlation between specific gravity and solubility.
Quartz occurs in many varieties in almost all types of igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks. It has also been found in meteorites and in some lunar rocks.
Quartz crystals lack a centre of symmetry or planes of symmetry and have one crystallographic axis (c) perpendicular to three polar axes (a) that are 120° apart. One end of a polar axis is different from its other end; when mechanical stress is applied on such an axis, opposite electrical charges develop on each end. This leads to important applications in electronics as a frequency control and in pressure gauges and other devices. The lack of symmetry planes parallel to the vertical axis allows quartz crystals to occur as two types: left-handed or right-handed (enantiomorphism). Left-handed quartz is less than 1 percent more abundant than right-handed quartz. The structural tetrahedrons spiral upward through the crystal in the sense of the handedness parallel to the c axis. Similarly, if polarized light is transmitted by a quartz crystal along the c-axis direction, the plane is rotated in the direction of the handedness by tens of degrees per millimetre, the amount depending on the wavelength of the light. This property is used in optical instruments such as monochromators.
The requirements for high-purity crystals for electronic frequency applications have led to the development of industrial synthesis methods based on the differences in silica solubility with temperature. Nutrient crystals are placed in the hot portion of a solution-filled autoclave, and an oriented seed crystal free from twinning is placed in the cooler portion. Crystals weighing thousands of grams can be grown in a few weeks.
Quartz shows less range in chemical composition than do most other minerals, but it commonly contains tens to hundreds of parts per million of aluminum atoms substituting for silicon atoms, with charge balance maintained by the incorporation of small atoms, such as hydrogen, lithium, or sodium. Titanium, magnesium, or iron atoms substituting for silicon atoms also have been reported, but anionic substitution (i.e., substitution for the negative ion, oxygen) is limited because the linkage of the tetrahedrons is disrupted.
Coloured varieties of quartz are numerous and have many causes. Most colours result from mechanically incorporated admixtures within fine-crystallized or granular quartz, but some coarse-crystallized varieties, such as amethyst (violet), citrine (yellow), milky quartz, smoky quartz or morion (black), or rose quartz, may be coloured by ions other than silicon and oxygen that occur within the crystal structure. Small fractions of 1 percent by weight of iron, aluminum, manganese, titanium, hydrogen, and small alkali atoms, such as lithium and sodium, have been shown to be the cause of different colours. Heat treatment or various irradiation treatments under oxidizing or reducing atmospheres are used to change one coloured variety to another. Citrine is commonly produced by heat-treating amethyst at 250–400 °C (482–752 °F), for example.
Quartz may contain inclusions of other minerals, such as rutile (rutilated quartz), tourmaline, asbestiform amphiboles, or platy minerals, such as mica, iron oxides, or chlorite (aventurine).
