Tangshan earthquake of 1976, also called Great Tangshan Earthquake,  earthquake on July 28, 1976, with a magnitude of 7.5, which nearly razed the Chinese coal-mining and industrial city of Tangshan, located about 68 miles (110 km) east of Beijing. The death toll, thought to be one of the largest in recorded history, was officially reported as 242,000 persons, but it may have been as high as 655,000. At least 700,000 more people were injured, and property damage was extensive, reaching even to Beijing. Most of the fatalities resulted from the collapse of unreinforced masonry homes where people were sleeping.
The main shock struck at 3:42 am. Its epicentre was located in the southern part of the city of Tangshan, some 9 miles (15 km) above the earthquake’s focus, and shaking was felt more than 680 miles (1,100 km) away in all directions. Later that same day, a major aftershock (magnitude 7.1) occurred in the city of Luanxian, some 43 miles (70 km) to the northeast. This aftershock caused additional damage and casualties and hampered efforts to rescue people already trapped beneath rubble.
The earthquake occurred along a previously unknown fault, now called the Tangshan Fault, in the Cangdong fault system near that system’s intersection with the Yin Shan–Yan Shan mountain belt. The Tangshan Fault is a strike-slip fault oriented in a north-northeasterly direction. The main shock caused a 75-mile (120-km) subsurface rupture that extended bilaterally north-northeast and south-southwest of Tangshan; it also caused prominent surface faults to appear in the city.
Approximately 3,650 square miles (9,500 square km) of the surrounding region endured earthquake intensities of VIII (severe) or above on the modified Mercalli scale. In the city of Tangshan the intensity reached X (extreme). The shaking, which lasted 14 to 16 seconds, transformed much of the region’s exceptionally deep sandy soil into a fluidlike mass (liquefaction). Since few buildings were anchored to bedrock, the shaking and subsequent liquefaction of the soil destabilized and brought down most of the structures throughout the affected area. The quake either destroyed or severely damaged more than 85 percent of unreinforced houses, multistory buildings, and other structures in Tangshan.
The earthquake also took a toll on infrastructure and agriculture. Liquefaction, combined with the sudden emergence of surface faults, wrecked roads, rail lines, bridges, dams, wells, and other infrastructure. 
It also triggered sand blows throughout the region, which silted wells and irrigation ditches. Sand blows, which expel wet sand from the ground, result from the increased weight brought on by slumping layers of soil upon layers of waterlogged sand below. South of Tangshan, where liquefaction was the highest, the tremendous outpouring of sand caused significant damage to crops.
