Tetsuya Fujita, in full Tetsuya Theodore Fujita, also called Ted Fujita or T. Theodore Fujita, original name Fujita Tetsuya,  (born October 23, 1920, Kitakyūshū City, Japan—died November 19, 1998, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), Japanese-born American meteorologist who created the Fujita Scale, or F-Scale, a system of classifying tornado intensity based on damage to structures and vegetation. He also discovered macrobursts and microbursts, weather phenomena that are associated with severe thunderstorms and are hazards to aviation.
Fujita earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 1943 from Meiji College of Technology, Kitakyūshū City, Japan, where he became an assistant professor in the physics department in 1944. Upon completion of a doctoral degree from Tokyo University in 1953, he moved to the United States and joined the meteorology department at the University of Chicago. After a trip to Japan in 1955–56 to obtain an immigrant visa, he returned to the University of Chicago. Fujita became a U.S. citizen in 1968 and took “Theodore” as a middle name. He remained at the University of Chicago, serving in a variety of positions, until his death.
Early in his career, Fujita turned his attention to tornadoes, a subject of lifelong fascination. He made extensive use of aerial surveys of tornado tracks and took innumerable aerial photographs, displaying an uncanny ability to discern order and pattern in jumbles of debris and downed trees. His post-event analyses of tornadoes were holistic, bringing together not only traditional meteorological data on temperatures and winds but also photography of damaged structures, photogrammetric analyses of movies of tornadoes to estimate the magnitude of the swirling winds, analysis of bounce and drag marks on the surface, and observation of directions in which trees had been uprooted and debris and detritus thrown. The resulting reports with their detailed mappings told simple, clear stories about one of nature’s most powerful events. Fujita’s detailed maps of tornado tracks were hand-drawn, reportedly because he did not trust computers for such fine-scale work.
He introduced the concept of the tornado “family,” a sequence of tornadoes, each with a unique path, produced by a single thunderstorm over a few hours. Prior to this, long damage paths were commonly attributed to a single tornado that sometimes “skipped” along its path.
Fujita’s analysis of the Palm Sunday Outbreak of April 11–12, 1965, was the first systematic analysis of a regional outbreak. Based on this study and an airborne observation of a large dust devil, he put forth the concept of the “multiple vortex tornado,” that is, a system of smaller vortices circling around a common centre. These small embedded vortices—sometimes termed suction vortices—are often found in the most violent tornadoes and may contain the highest wind speeds known (greater than 500 km per hour, or 300 miles per hour).
His study of damage in the Palm Sunday Outbreak also led directly to his intensity scale for characterizing tornadoes. The F-Scale was used internationally to estimate tornado intensity based upon severity of damage to buildings and vegetation. It was later revised by a team of meteorologists as the Enhanced Fujita Scale (EF-Scale), which was adopted for use in the U.S. in 2007 and in Canada in 2013. (For the scale, see tornado.)
The capstone of Fujita’s work with tornadoes is considered by many to have been his work with the Super Outbreak of April 3–4, 1974, a national-scale outbreak of 148 tornadoes (4 of these tornadoes were later reclassified as downbursts by Fujita). His maps of complex damage patterns aided his identification of a previously undiscovered phenomena, the downburst and the microburst. These sudden, severe downdrafts can result in 250-km- (150-mile-) per-hour winds on or near the ground that often uproot trees in discernible starburst patterns. In the face of widespread skepticism among his colleagues, Fujita insisted that these damage patterns were the products of columns of air descending rapidly from a thunderstorm, striking the surface, and then flowing out in all directions. He received national attention in 1975 when he linked an airliner crash at New York’s Kennedy Airport to microbursts. Subsequent studies showed conclusively that sudden downdrafts from thunderstorms were indeed a previously unappreciated aviation hazard, a finding that led to installation of special Doppler radars at major commercial airports to improve safety. Much of Fujita’s later work was devoted to describing how these downdrafts interact with aircraft during takeoff and landing.
Fujita also studied other forms of severe weather, such as thunderstorms and hurricanes. He pioneered novel techniques for analyzing small to midsize weather conditions, laying the foundation for the “mesoscale analyses” now carried out in weather stations all over the world. He introduced the basic concepts of thunderstorm architecture, including terms such as wall cloud and tail cloud that are in widespread use today.
The table provides the Fujita Scale of tornado intensity, which has been superceded in the U.S. and Canada by the EF-Scale.
