Transform fault,  in geology and oceanography, a type of fault in which two tectonic plates slide past one another. A transform fault may occur in the portion of a fracture zone that exists between different offset spreading centres or that connects spreading centres to deep-sea trenches in subduction zones. The spatial orientation of transform faults is typically parallel to plate motions; however, this is not always the case. Transform faults are the only segments of fracture zones that are seismically active.
In the 1960s the American geologist W. Jason Morgan, one of the several outstanding pioneers in plate tectonics, recognized that transform faults are zones where opposing lithospheric plates slip past one another. Morgan proposed that opposing plates along an oceanic ridge crest offset by fracture zones are divided by the spreading centres and transform faults. The inactive portions of the fracture zone on the ridge flanks are scars on the ocean floor created in the transform faults. About the same time Morgan was forming his theory, the Canadian geologist and geophysicist J. Tuzo Wilson recognized the seismic nature of transform faults and other features and explained the phenomenon as a transfer of motion from one spreading centre to another.
Morgan’s theory made a very dramatic prediction: namely, that the direction of motion on the transform faults was opposite to the offsets of the ridge crests. For example, if a ridge crest was offset to the left by a transform fault, implying leftward movement on a fault joining the offset crests, the movement across the transform fault was instead to the right. This is clear when it is realized that the plate boundaries are confined to the spreading centres and transform faults, not to the inactive part of the fracture zone. Seismic studies of earthquakes from transform faults soon revealed that the motion was opposite, as predicted.
Not everywhere in the ocean basins are plate motions exactly parallel to transform faults. In places where a component of opening motion occurs across the transform, volcanic activity results, and the fracture zone is labeled a leaky transform fault. South of New Zealand, between it and the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge, a component of shortening is occurring across a transform called the Macquarie Ridge. There subduction may be taking place at a slow rate.
