tropical cyclone, also called typhoon or hurricane,  an intense circular storm that originates over warm tropical oceans and is characterized by low atmospheric pressure, high winds, and heavy rain. Drawing energy from the sea surface and maintaining its strength as long as it remains over warm water, a tropical cyclone generates winds that exceed 119 km (74 miles) per hour. In extreme cases winds may exceed 240 km (150 miles) per hour, and gusts may surpass 320 km (200 miles) per hour. Accompanying these strong winds are torrential rains and a devastating phenomenon known as the storm surge, an elevation of the sea surface that can reach 6 metres (20 feet) above normal levels. Such a combination of high winds and water makes cyclones a serious hazard for coastal areas in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Every year during the late summer months (July–September in the Northern Hemisphere and January–March in the Southern Hemisphere), cyclones strike regions as far apart as the Gulf Coast of North America, northwestern Australia, and eastern India and Bangladesh.
Tropical cyclones are known by various names in different parts of the world. In the North Atlantic Ocean and the eastern North Pacific they are called hurricanes, and in the western North Pacific around the Philippines, Japan, and China the storms are referred to as typhoons. In the western South Pacific and Indian Ocean they are variously referred to as severe tropical cyclones, tropical cyclones, or simply cyclones. All these different names refer to the same type of storm.
Tropical cyclones are compact, circular storms, generally some 320 km (200 miles) in diameter, whose winds swirl around a central region of low atmospheric pressure. The winds are driven by this low-pressure core and by the rotation of Earth, which deflects the path of the wind through a phenomenon known as the Coriolis force. As a result, tropical cyclones rotate in a counterclockwise (or cyclonic) direction in the Northern Hemisphere and in a clockwise (or anticyclonic) direction in the Southern Hemisphere.
The wind field of a tropical cyclone may be divided into three regions. First is a ring-shaped outer region, typically having an outer radius of about 160 km (100 miles) and an inner radius of about 30 to 50 km (20 to 30 miles). In this region the winds increase uniformly in speed toward the centre. Wind speeds attain their maximum value at the second region, the eyewall, which is typically 15 to 30 km (10 to 20 miles) from the centre of the storm. The eyewall in turn surrounds the interior region, called the eye, where wind speeds decrease rapidly and the air is often calm. These main structural regions are described in greater detail below.
A characteristic feature of tropical cyclones is the eye, a central region of clear skies, warm temperatures, and low atmospheric pressure. Typically, atmospheric pressure at the surface of Earth is about 1,000 millibars. At the centre of a tropical cyclone, however, it is typically around 960 millibars, and in a very intense “super typhoon” of the western Pacific it may be as low as 880 millibars. In addition to low pressure at the centre, there is also a rapid variation of pressure across the storm, with most of the variation occurring near the centre. This rapid variation results in a large pressure gradient force, which is responsible for the strong winds present in the eyewall (described below).
Horizontal winds within the eye, on the other hand, are light. In addition, there is a weak sinking motion, or subsidence, as air is pulled into the eyewall at the surface. As the air subsides, it compresses slightly and warms, so that temperatures at the centre of a tropical cyclone are some 5.5 °C (10 °F) higher than in other regions of the storm. Because warmer air can hold more moisture before condensation occurs, the eye of the cyclone is generally free of clouds. Reports of the air inside the eye being “oppressive” or “sultry” are most likely a psychological response to the rapid change from high winds and rain in the eyewall to calm conditions in the eye.
The most dangerous and destructive part of a tropical cyclone is the eyewall. Here winds are strongest, rainfall is heaviest, and deep convective clouds rise from close to Earth’s surface to a height of 15,000 metres (49,000 feet). As noted above, the high winds are driven by rapid changes in atmospheric pressure near the eye, which creates a large pressure gradient force. Winds actually reach their greatest speed at an altitude of about 300 metres (1,000 feet) above the surface. Closer to the surface they are slowed by friction, and higher than 300 metres they are weakened by a slackening of the horizontal pressure gradient force. This slackening is related to the temperature structure of the storm. Air is warmer in the core of a tropical cyclone, and this higher temperature causes atmospheric pressure in the centre to decrease at a slower rate with height than occurs in the surrounding atmosphere. The lessened contrast in atmospheric pressure with altitude causes the horizontal pressure gradient to weaken with height, which in turn results in a decrease in wind speed.
Friction at the surface, in addition to lowering wind speeds, causes the wind to turn inward toward the area of lowest pressure. Air flowing into the low-pressure eye cools by expansion and in turn extracts heat and water vapour from the sea surface. Areas of maximum heating have the strongest updrafts, and the eyewall exhibits the greatest vertical wind speeds in the storm—up to 5 to 10 metres (16.5 to 33 feet) per second, or 18 to 36 km (11 to 22 miles) per hour. While such velocities are much less than those of the horizontal winds, updrafts are vital to the existence of the towering convective clouds embedded in the eyewall. Much of the heavy rainfall associated with tropical cyclones comes from these clouds.
The upward movement of air in the eyewall also causes the eye to be wider aloft than at the surface. As the air spirals upward it conserves its angular momentum, which depends on the distance from the centre of the cyclone and on the wind speed around the centre. Since the wind speed decreases with height, the air must move farther from the centre of the storm as it rises.
When updrafts reach the stable tropopause (the upper boundary of the troposphere, some 16 km [10 miles] above the surface), the air flows outward. The Coriolis force deflects this outward flow, creating a broad anticyclonic circulation aloft. Therefore, horizontal circulation in the upper levels of a tropical cyclone is opposite to that near the surface.
In addition to deep convective cells (compact regions of vertical air movement) surrounding the eye, there are often secondary cells arranged in bands around the centre. These bands, commonly called rainbands, spiral into the centre of the storm.  In some cases the rainbands are stationary relative to the centre of the moving storm, and in other cases they seem to rotate around the centre. The rotating cloud bands often are associated with an apparent wobbling of the storm track. If this happens as the tropical cyclone approaches a coastline, there may be large differences between the forecast landfall positions and actual landfall.
As a tropical cyclone makes landfall, surface friction increases, which in turn increases the convergence of airflow into the eyewall and the vertical motion of air occurring there. The increased convergence and rising of moisture-laden air is responsible for the torrential rains associated with tropical cyclones, which may be in excess of 250 mm (10 inches) in a 24-hour period. At times a storm may stall, allowing heavy rains to persist over an area for several days. In extreme cases, rainfall totals of 760 mm (30 inches) in a five-day period have been reported.
