Tropical storm,  organized centre of low pressure that originates over warm tropical oceans. The maximum sustained surface winds of tropical storms range from 63 to 118 km (39 to 73 miles) per hour. These storms represent an intermediate stage between loosely organized tropical depressions and more intense tropical cyclones, which are also called hurricanes or typhoons in different parts of the globe. A tropical storm may occur in any of Earth’s ocean basins in which tropical cyclones are found (North Atlantic, northeast Pacific, central Pacific, northwest and southwest Pacific, and Indian). The size and structure of tropical storms are similar to those of the more intense and mature tropical cyclones; they possess horizontal dimensions of about 160 km (100 miles) and winds that are highest at the surface but decrease with altitude. The winds typically attain their maximum intensity at approximately 30–50 km (20–30 miles) away from the centre of the circulation, but the distinct eyewall that is a characteristic of mature tropical cyclones is usually absent.
The precursors of tropical storms in the Atlantic are easterly waves that form over Africa and propagate toward the west. The easterly waves are characterized by wind speeds of approximately 16 km (10 miles) per hour and convective clouds that are loosely organized around a central area of low pressure, or trough axis. The winds transfer heat and moisture from the sea surface to the atmosphere. If local atmospheric conditions support deep convection and low vertical wind shear, the system may become organized and begin to intensify. Intensification occurs as the air warmed at the surface begins to rise. The transfer of air away from the centre of the trough axis causes the surface pressure to fall, which in turn causes higher winds that increase the transfer of heat at the surface. The Coriolis force, which is a product of Earth’s rotation, causes the winds to rotate about the centre, thereby generating a closed and symmetric circulation pattern.
A similar process occurs in other ocean basins. In the western Pacific, tropical storms originate from loosely organized convection events in the monsoon trough, which is a large-scale area of low pressure that lies along the Equator. The exact mechanism that results in the intensification of the storm is not well understood, but surface pressure falls associated with tropical upper tropospheric troughs (TUTTs) likely play a role.
Once the surface wind speeds in a tropical depression reach 63 km (39 miles) per hour, the regional storm-warning centre assigns a name to the disturbance, and it is classified as a tropical storm. This tropical-storm classification is used until the wind speeds increase above 117 km (73 miles) per hour, in which case the storm is reclassified as a tropical cyclone. In the Atlantic and eastern Pacific, tropical cyclones are classified according to their intensity using the Saffir-Simpson scale (scaled from 1 to 5), a tool used to predict the extent of flooding from rainfall and storm surge and the level of property damage. A “category 1” storm possesses hurricane-force winds in excess of 119 km (74 miles) per hour. Australian forecasters have developed a similar scale, but a category 1 on the Australian scale corresponds to the tropical-storm range of wind speeds.
Since tropical storms are the precursors to the more intense tropical cyclones, they occur more often. The yearly average numbers of tropical storms occurring in the various ocean basins are as follows: North Atlantic 13, northeastern Pacific 16, northwestern Pacific 27, northern Indian 5, southwestern Indian 10, and Australian (that is, the southwestern Pacific and southeast Indian basins) 16. In all ocean basins, roughly 45 percent of the tropical storms continue to intensify to minimal tropical-cyclone strength or greater.
A number of factors may result in the failure of a tropical storm to continue to intensify. In some cases, the storm moves into a region where the large-scale environment does not favour further growth. The sea surface temperature may be too low, the middle atmosphere too dry, or the winds at upper levels too high to support the continued vertical development of the storm. In other cases, the tropical storm makes landfall before reaching hurricane strength and begins to dissipate.
The extreme damage that often accompanies the landfall of tropical cyclones usually does not occur with tropical storms. The lower wind speeds result in a minimal storm surge of less than four feet (about one metre), and most damage is confined to plants, trees, and unanchored structures, such as mobile homes. Nevertheless, low-lying areas prone to flooding from prolonged periods of rain or mountainous regions subject to flash flooding may be severely impacted by tropical storms. In some regions, rains from tropical systems are an important part of the annual climate and contribute to the total hydrologic cycle.
