Varved deposit,   any form of repetitive sedimentary rock stratification, either bed or lamination, that was deposited within a one-year time period. This annual deposit may comprise paired contrasting laminations of alternately finer and coarser silt or clay, reflecting seasonal sedimentation (summer and winter) within the year. Varved deposits are to be distinguished from rhythmites, the latter also being made up of paired laminations or beds but with an annual cyclicity that cannot be proved.
Varved deposits are usually associated with fine-grained sediments, the muds or mudrocks, which include both silt- and clay-grade materials. Laminations in many mudrocks are both thin and laterally persistent over large areas. They may exhibit the right order of thickness, as shown by the rates of sedimentation estimated for times past or observed at present, and have a structure similar to laminations currently being formed. Using this premise, one may deduce that many mudrock laminations are of an annual nature and that the varved deposits depend upon the yearly climatic cycle. This cycle affects temperature, salinity, and silt content of waters as well as the seasonal production of plankton.
Varved deposits are most commonly associated with sedimentation in lakes, particularly those that are located in glacial or proglacial environments. During the summer months sediment is transported into the lake from the surrounding drainage basin as a result of ice melting and outwash. The central part of the lake receives relatively coarse sediment—silt to very fine-grade sand detritus—distributed by currents. The sediment settles to the bottom, with the coarser particles settling faster. In the wintertime the lake may not receive any new sediment input, probably because the lake is ice covered. Thus the finest sediments, the clays, flocculate in the water column and settle out of suspension in the lake. The end product is a coarse- and fine-grained sediment couplet, the sediment being light (summer) and dark coloured (winter), respectively. This couplet is the hallmark of varved deposits. The annual cyclicity of the varved deposits in modern lakes can be proven as seasonal by using pollen analysis or by undertaking carbon-14 dating of the succession. Some varved sediments in the glacigenic environment can display an exponential decrease in thickness of the couplet away from the ice front. This may be a result, in part, of the couplet being deposited by density current and autosuspension mechanisms operating within the water body.
Varved deposits in recent and ancient sedimentary sequences, where they are often termed varvite, frequently display disruption of the fine lamination and couplets by outsize clasts. These clasts are called dropstones and were introduced vertically through the water column into the lake area, where only fine-grained sediments normally accumulate, by ice rafting and melting. This phenomenon of disrupted varvites constitutes the strongest evidence of past glacial activity in a region.
Varved sediments also can be found in nonglacial lakes and marine settings and as a result of aeolian processes. Varved deposits are commonly associated with evaporite sequences where lake sediments display detrital and chemical cycles. These thicker couplets are the product of a cyclic variation in rainfall imposed upon the deposits of a continuously subsiding lake basin.
