Younger Dryas, also called Younger Dryas stadial,  cool period between roughly 12,900 and 11,600 years ago that disrupted the prevailing warming trend occurring in the Northern Hemisphere at the end of the Pleistocene Epoch (which lasted from 2.6 million to 11,700 years ago). The Younger Dryas was characterized by cooler average temperatures that returned parts of Europe and North America to ice age conditions. The onset of the Younger Dryas took less than 100 years, and the period persisted for roughly 1,300 years. After the period ended, an interval of rapid warming followed, and average temperatures increased to near present-day levels. The Younger Dryas was named after Dryas octopetala, a pale yellow wildflower of the rose family, typical of cold open Arctic environments.
During the Pleistocene Epoch, extensive ice sheets and other glaciers formed repeatedly on large landmasses. The Younger Dryas, one of several very abrupt climatic changes that took place near the end of the late Pleistocene, was preceded by a sudden warming interval beginning approximately 14,700 years ago. This interval, the Bølling-Allerød interstadial, saw the rapid retreat of the immense Pleistocene ice sheets. A second abrupt climatic warming event, approximately 11,600 years ago, marked the end of the Younger Dryas and the beginning of the Holocene Epoch (11,700 years ago to the present) and Earth’s modern climate. There is evidence that this warming was quite rapid; Greenland ice-core samples suggest that local temperatures increased by up to 10 °C (18 °F) in just a few decades.
Such dramatic climatic reversals occurring in such a short time cannot be explained by Milankovitch cycles (that is, cyclical changes to the shape of Earth’s orbit, the tilt of Earth’s axis, and the wobblelike movement of Earth on its axis with respect to the Sun), which play out over tens of thousands of years. A number of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the Younger Dryas, but so far there is no consensus on its cause.
The leading hypothesis, first proposed by Finnish scientist Claes Rooth in 1982 and later expanded by American climatologist Wallace Broecker and others, postulated that large amounts of fresh water were discharged into the North Atlantic about 12,800 years ago. More specifically, the retreat of the Laurentide Ice Sheet allowed Lake Agassiz, a glacial meltwater lake that covered a large part of north-central North America, to drain eastward into the Atlantic Ocean rather than southward into the Mississippi River. Broecker and American geologist George Denton proposed that this large influx of fresh water may have stopped higher-density seawater in the North Atlantic from descending to lower depths, thereby interrupting thermohaline circulation (a system of surface and deepwater currents that distributes large amounts of heat around the globe) and initiating a short-term return to glacial conditions.
Some studies have noted the occurrence of similar freshwater pulses entering the Atlantic from the Mackenzie River in northern Canada. Such pulses may have slowed thermohaline circulation. Other hypotheses suggest that volcanic eruptions, negative radiative forcing, a large comet impact, modified atmospheric circulation patterns from the changing shape of the ice cap, or an extended period of reduced sunspot activity may have played significant roles in bringing about the Younger Dryas.
The first evidence of the Younger Dryas came from ice cores taken from European maritime environments dating to the late Pleistocene. The ice cores showed that the warming process produced abrupt wholesale melting of late Pleistocene glaciers. Subsequent examination of terrestrial plants and pollen in the cores indicated that forests were replaced by tundra vegetation during a cool period.
The timing of past climatic fluctuations has been determined by measuring the ratio of two oxygen isotopes, oxygen-18 and oxygen-16, present in air bubbles trapped in different layers of the ice. Isotope data suggests that central Greenland was nearly 14 °C (24.5 °F) colder during the Younger Dryas than it is today and that the sudden warming that ended the Younger Dryas took about 40 to 50 years.
Radiocarbon dating of glacial moraines, measurements of oxygen isotopes in ice cores and in stalactites and stalagmites in caves, and pollen records indicate that climate shifts of various kinds took place during the Younger Dryas throughout the globe. Data show that the cooling was limited primarily to the Northern Hemisphere, specifically the North Atlantic region, which included Europe and eastern North America. Evidence of advancing continental ice sheets coincident with the Younger Dryas is reported from the Scandinavian Ice Sheet, the Laurentide Ice Sheet in eastern North America, the Cordilleran Ice Sheet in western North America, and the Siberian Ice Sheet in Russia. Alpine glaciers in the Northern Hemisphere responded to the abrupt cooling by expanding. Evidence for this appears in many places in the Rocky Mountains of the United States and Canada, the Cascade Range of Washington state, and the European Alps. Abrupt shifts in the plant communities in California and other parts of the southwestern United States have been linked to the onset of prolonged cooler and drier conditions coinciding with the beginning of the interval.
Researchers estimate that sea surface temperatures in eastern Canada declined by 5–10 °C (9–18 °F) during the Younger Dryas. Away from the western part of the North Atlantic, sea surface temperature declines were not as great; temperatures in the Mediterranean Sea fell by only 1–3 °C (1.8–5.4 °F), and the waters in Venezuela’s Cariaco Basin and along the coast of northern California cooled by about 3 °C (5.4 °F).
Many parts of the tropics and the Southern Hemisphere became warmer and wetter during the Younger Dryas. Evidence of sea surface temperature increases occur in the Caribbean Sea, the eastern equatorial Atlantic Ocean, and the tropical Pacific Ocean. Studies of high-altitude regions of the Southern Hemisphere—such as the Bolivian, Peruvian, and Patagonian Andes and the Southern Alps of New Zealand—reveal evidence of warmer conditions and declining glacier coverage.
