Aleta Baun,  (born March 16, 1966, Lelobatan, western Timor, Indonesia), Indonesian conservationist who was awarded the 2013 Goldman Environmental Prize for her successful efforts to halt the ecologically destructive practices of the mining industry in the remote forests of western Timor island.
Baun, who was born into a poor farming family, was formally educated through high school and learned tribal traditions and values, including the sacred bond that the indigenous Molo people had with nature, from the elders and women in the village. Sharing that knowledge with others initiated her role as community leader, and she was given the nickname “Mama Aleta.”
During the 1980s local government officials illegally issued permits to mining companies, an action that allowed the companies to cut marble stones from the mountains in the Molo territory without consulting local villagers. Deforestation and landslides caused by mining proved a direct threat to the villagers, who used the forests to gather food and medicine as well as the plants needed to create natural dyes for their traditional woven cloths. Landslides were especially devastating to villages downstream, because they polluted the region’s major rivers, which supplied drinking and irrigation water for the majority of people inhabiting the island. In the late 1990s Baun organized a movement with three other women, walking from village to village (some trips taking up to six hours) to gather support against the mining operations. Such action prompted violent retaliation against many of the protesters, and Baun was the target of an assassination attempt that forced her to go into hiding in the forests with her baby.
Despite the intimidation, Baun’s campaign grew to include the support of hundreds of villagers and culminated in 2006 in a peaceful protest. Some 150 women occupied the mining sites for a year, sitting on marble stones as they wove their traditional cloths. The mining companies, in the face of mounting pressure from increased public support (throughout Indonesia and overseas) for the weavers, terminated their operations, and by 2010 they had withdrawn from the area.
Baun continued her crusade against future development projects by working with other communities throughout western Timor island to map out their traditional forests in an effort to establish indigenous territorial rights and defend their lands from impending exploitation from the mining, oil, and gas industries as well as from commercial agriculture. She also led an effort to safeguard and reforest the areas damaged by the mining activities and encouraged economic independence for the region by establishing a locally based economy focused on sustainable farming and the sale of local handiwork.
