Anil Kumar Agarwal,  (born November 23, 1947, Kanpur, India—died January 2, 2002, Kanpur), Indian journalist and scholar best known for his work as one of the country’s most prominent and respected environmental activists. He was the founder and director of the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE), the leading environmental nongovernmental organization (NGO) in India. He also was an outspoken advocate for improving the environmental and social conditions that affected India’s impoverished citizens.
Agarwal, the son of a local landowner, was trained as a mechanical engineer at the Indian Institute of Technology in Kanpur. After graduating in 1970, he decided to pursue a career in science journalism, and in 1973 he joined The Hindustan Times as a science correspondent. His interest in India’s environmental concerns was influenced by the Chipko movement, a mass protest against the indiscriminate felling of trees that began in 1974 and was led by the women of Reni, a Himalayan village in Uttarakhand. His writing on this movement garnered international acclaim.
In 1980 his vision of an environmental movement at the national and global levels, which included solutions to India’s growing pollution and land-degradation problems, prompted him to set up the CSE.  Through the CSE, Agarwal published The State of India’s Environment 1982: A Citizens’ Report, the first in a series of reports that summarized India’s environmental situation. During the mid-1980s, Agarwal served as the chair of the Kenya-based Environmental Liaison Centre International (ELCI), a coalition of environmental NGOs. In 1992 he launched Down to Earth, a magazine addressing environmental and science issues and promoting the causes of sustainable development. Throughout the 1990s, he wrote editorials in the magazine that focused on urban environmental problems, political changes, and social justice issues associated with globalization.
Agarwal wrote numerous articles for national and international publications. He also wrote more than 20 books, among them Global Warming in an Unequal World: A Case of Environmental Colonialism (1991; coauthored with Sunita Narain). In 1987, in recognition of his environmental activism, Agarwal was elected to the Global 500 Roll of Honour by the United Nations Environment Programme. The Indian government honoured him with two of the country’s highest civilian awards: the Padma Shri in 1986 and the Padma Bhushan in 2000. In 2002 the Society for Conservation of Biology recognized Agarwal posthumously with its Distinguished Service Award, given for his innovative work in the field of environmental conservation.
