Boise National Forest,  large area of evergreen coniferous forest in southwestern Idaho, U.S., located north and east of Boise. Established in 1908, it has an area of about 4,080 square miles (10,570 square km). Portions of both Frank Church–River of No Return Wilderness and Sawtooth Wilderness Area are located in the forest. Payette National Forest borders it on the north, and Challis and Sawtooth national forests adjoin it to the east.
The national forest is divided into two segments. The principal part lies east of the North Fork Payette River and is roughly teardrop-shaped, with maximum dimensions of some 110 miles (175 km) north-south and 55 miles (90 km) east-west. To the west and separated from it by the valley of the North Fork Payette River is a narrow outlying section of the forest, about 37 miles (60 km) north-south and 12 miles (19 km) east-west at its widest point; most of it, however, is much narrower. The main portion of the forest is generally steep and mountainous, the Sawtooth Range constituting much of the area; elevation decreases somewhat toward the Boise River valley in the southwest. The highest point within the forest is Big Baldy, 9,722 feet (2,963 metres) above sea level. The Middle Fork Salmon and South Fork Salmon rivers, the Middle Fork Payette River, and all three forks of the Boise River have their sources in the forest. Tree species include ponderosa and lodgepole pine, Douglas and grand fir, and Engelmann spruce. Lakes and rivers have populations of trout and salmon. Deer and elk, bobcats and lynx, wolves, bears, and otters are among the forest’s mammal species.
Following the discovery of gold north of Boise in 1862, numerous mining communities sprang up in the locality. As the deposits were depleted, many of the mining sites became lumbering or livestock-grazing outposts; ponderosa pine logging and sheep ranching were important to the local economy. Some of the mining towns, however, died out and became ghost towns of interest to tourists. Logging remains an important use of the forest.
The national forest is a popular recreation area, noted for its fishing and hunting, hiking, and rafting on the Middle Fork Salmon River. The two scenic wilderness areas on the eastern side of the forest, where commercial exploitation is forbidden, are kept virtually roadless, although the Frank Church wilderness has several airstrips. Bogus Basin Ski Resort is a winter-sports centre, 16 miles (26 km) north of Boise, which is the forest headquarters.
