Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI),  U.S. nonprofit organization, founded in 1971, that aims to study, advocate for, and influence legislation on environmental, health, and other science- and technology-related issues to protect consumers. The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) conducts research on a variety of topics, including food safety, scientific integrity, genetically modified foods, and alcohol. The organization reveals information about the content of products that manufacturers may not otherwise make available to consumers and helps them make more informed decisions relevant to their health and well-being.
The CSPI works to expose deceptive advertising in product labeling, such as when products are labeled as “all natural” when in reality they may contain artificial flavours or other artificial substances. The CSPI has also led efforts to influence the U.S. Congress to place stricter limits on contaminated foods (e.g., meats contaminated with Escherichia coli bacteria). Since 1981 the CSPI has led a campaign to inform the public about the risks of drinking alcohol and to promote its initiative for responsible marketing by alcohol producers. The CSPI has advocated for strict limits on how alcohol can be marketed to the general public as well as to youths.
The CSPI has raised awareness about the overuse of antibiotic medicines. The overuse of antibiotics has led to the development of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria, which makes treatment of illnesses such as tuberculosis more difficult. CSPI has also advocated for the reduction of antibiotics in livestock production. Many livestock feeds come laced with antibiotics to try to reduce illnesses in the herd. The overuse of antibiotics in livestock production can result in antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria and may allow for the introduction of these bacteria into humans.
The CSPI is engaged in raising awareness of the benefits and risks of agricultural biotechnology. The group notes that while genetically engineered (GE) foods have been shown to be scientifically safe to consume, there is need for more governmental oversight to make sure GE crops are used in a sustainable and judicious fashion in the United States and worldwide.
Funding for the work of CSPI primarily comes from subscriptions to its publication, the Nutrition Action Healthletter, which documents the organization’s research and advocacy work, and from contributions. About 15 percent of its budget comes from grants given by foundations, such as the Robert Wood Johnson and Rockefeller foundations.
