Corbett National Park, also called Jim Corbett National Park,  natural area in southern Uttarakhand state, northern India. It was established as Hailey National Park in 1936 and was first renamed Ramganga in the mid-1950s, before the name was changed to Corbett later that decade in memory of Jim Corbett, a well-known British sportsman and writer. The park itself occupies an area of 201 square miles (521 square km). It is part of the larger Corbett Tiger Reserve, which includes adjacent protected areas and has a total area of 497 square miles (1,288 square km). It is India’s oldest national park.
The park is located in the foothills of the Himalayas—about 35 miles (50 km) northwest of Ramnagar, the park headquarters—and lies at elevations ranging from some 1,260 to 3,610 feet (385 to 1,100 metres). It mainly occupies the broad Patlidoon Valley, through which the Ramganga River flows in a westerly direction. The river was dammed at the western end of the park to form a large reservoir in the centre of the reserve area and along the western side of the park that is used for sport fishing. The forest cover includes species of sal (Shorea), teak, oak, silver fir, spruce, cypress, birch, and bamboo. A reed forest was planted to afford natural cover for the park’s animals.
The park was established mainly for the protection of the Bengal tiger (Panthera tigris tigris); it is there that India’s Project Tiger was established in 1973 to provide havens for tigers in the country’s national parks. Among other mammals found in the park are langurs, sloth bears, Asiatic black bears, Indian gray mongooses, jungle cats, elephants, wild boars, chitals (spotted deer), barking deer, and nilgai (Indian antelope). Reptiles and amphibians include a variety of snakes (including cobras and pythons) and species of crocodiles (notably gavials and muggers). At least 600 resident and migrant bird species have been identified, including shikras (Levant sparrowhawks), Indian white-backed vultures, black partridges, golden orioles, red jungle fowl, black-crowned night herons, and peafowl.
The park is open from mid-November to mid-June; it is closed during the summer  monsoon season, when heavy rains make the roads impassable. Access is via Ramnagar, which has road and rail connections to other cities in the region. The park has roads that facilitate tours of it via jeep or elephant, and there are numerous machans, or observation posts, from which wildlife can be viewed. Overnight accommodations are available at several facilities within the park.
