Ecosystemic approach,  form of environmental governance that places ecosystemic dynamics at the heart of environmental policy making. The ecosystemic approach grounds policy making in a scientific understanding of the environment, the ecosystem paradigm. An ecosystem is a functional unit or complex of relations in which living organisms (plants, animals, fungi, and microorganisms) interact with one another and with their physical environment, forming a dynamic yet broadly stable system. It may be of any size. The paradigm emphasizes the structure and functioning of the unit as a whole and highlights the fundamental interdependence of the components within it. Each species fulfills a specific function within an ecosystem and depends on its interactions with the other components for its survival. An important implication is that the degradation of one element of the ecosystem or the disappearance of one species could modify the whole ecosystem and subsequently damage other components (or species) as well. In policy-making terms, this translates into the necessity to develop comprehensive integrated policies that protect the ecosystem as a whole by ensuring that none of its components are overexploited or depleted beyond renewable levels.
Historically, the rise of the ecosystem paradigm was coterminous with the establishment of ecology as an autonomous scientific discipline and with the development of a scientific approach to natural resource management. Conceptually, the ecosystem paradigm substituted the focus on the individual organism, hitherto the main unit of analysis in the natural sciences, which fostered a static and monadic conception of nature, with an attention to the milieu in which the individual organism is integrated. Discursively, this paradigm was accompanied by scientization of nature discourses, which saw the word nature increasingly replaced by the environment and which went hand in hand with a progressive rationalization of natural resource use.
In debates over environmental politics, the ecosystemic approach is contrasted with the species-by-species approach, both of which coexist today in natural resource management. The species-by-species approach is associated with the preservationist perspective, which tends to single out individual species for protection. The species-by-species approach has been criticized for offering too narrow a model of natural resource management. Critics complain that because the approach targets one species alone, it often obscures the role of that particular species in the broader ecosystem, thereby neglecting the ecosystem itself (or other parts of it), which may sometimes need to be protected more urgently than the particular species. For example, it is argued that whales, the sole focus of the International Whaling Commission, are more threatened by the state of the current oceans than they are by whaling. This has also been a major criticism addressed toward the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. By contrast, the ecosystemic approach (sometimes also evoked by terms such as biosphere) is offered as a more efficient alternative to natural resource management.
The ecosystemic approach was reinvigorated by the attention given to questions of global biodiversity degradation by the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity. This approach, in which humans, in their cultural diversity, feature as integral components of ecosystems, is also considered well suited to the objectives of sustainable development.
