Geochemical facies,  area or zone characterized by particular physiochemical conditions that influence the production and accumulation of sediment and usually distinguished by a characteristic element, minerals assemblage, or ratio of trace elements.
In sedimentary environments the concept of geochemical facies is best illustrated on an Eh-pH diagram, a diagram delineating the stability field of certain minerals in terms of the proton concentration (pH) and electron concentration (Eh). Certain related deposits exhibit contrasting mineralogies evidently owing to somewhat different depositional environments. For example, the sedimentary iron formations that formed in the Lake Superior region during Precambrian time (from about 4 billion to 542 million years ago) have been classified according to dominant iron mineral into four principal facies: sulfide, carbonate, oxide, and silicate. This area may serve as an explanatory example of the geochemical facies concept in general and these four facies in particular.
Evidently, the iron formations were deposited in restricted basins more or less isolated from the open sea, thus allowing development of distinctive Eh and pH conditions in each. The sulfide facies consists of black slates that contain up to 40 percent pyrite (iron sulfide; FeS2) and 5 to 15 percent carbon; an Eh-pH diagram shows that pyrite is stable near neutral pH (7) at a reducing Eh of about -200 millivolts. The carbonate facies consists of interbedded iron-rich carbonate and chert with no carbon; the Eh-pH diagram indicates simply that a shift upward in Eh sufficient to oxidize carbon but insufficient to oxidize iron could produce such an assemblage. The oxide facies, which contains primary magnetite and primary hematite, evidently was produced in weakly to strongly oxidizing—i.e., high Eh—conditions. The silicate facies is dominated by one or more of the hydrous ferrous silicates; the Eh-pH diagram suggests this facies was deposited in strongly reducing, alkaline conditions.
