Holmes Rolston III,  (born Nov. 19, 1932, Rockbridge Baths, Va., U.S.), American utilitarian philosopher and theologian who pioneered the fields of environmental ethics and environmental philosophy.
Rolston was the son and grandson of Presbyterian ministers. He earned a bachelor’s degree in physics and mathematics from Davidson College near Charlotte, N.C., in 1953; a bachelor of divinity degree from Union Theological Seminary in Richmond, Va., in 1956; and a doctorate in philosophical theology from the University of Edinburgh in 1958. He served as pastor of Walnut Grove Presbyterian Church in Bristol, Va., from 1958 until 1967. After receiving a master’s degree in the philosophy of science in 1968 from the University of Pittsburgh, he joined the philosophy department of Colorado State University, where he became a university distinguished professor in 1992.
Rolston’s article “Is There an Ecological Ethic?” was rejected by several journals before it was finally published in Ethics in 1975. It was the first article in a major philosophical journal to challenge the idea that nature is value-free and that all values stem from human perspectives; it also helped to launch environmental ethics as a branch of philosophical inquiry. Four years later Rolston cofounded the journal Environmental Ethics. In his book Science and Religion (1987), he wrote that “science is here to stay, and the religion that is divorced from science today will leave no offspring tomorrow.” His other major works included Environmental Ethics (1988), Philosophy Gone Wild (1989), and Genes, Genesis and God (1999); the latter was based on his Gifford Lectures on natural theology, which he delivered at the University of Edinburgh during the 1997–98 academic year.
Rolston was also a naturalist, and he performed field work in such places as the Grand Canyon, Siberia, the Amazon basin, Nepal, and Yellowstone National Park. During his visit to Antarctica in 2000, he became the only environmental philosopher to have lectured on all seven continents. In 2003 he was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress Toward Research or Discoveries About Spiritual Realities.
