invasive species, also called introduced species, alien species, or exotic species,  any nonnative species that significantly modifies or disrupts the ecosystems it colonizes. Such species may arrive in new areas through natural migration, but they are often introduced by the activities of other species. Human activities, such as those involved in global commerce and the pet trade, are considered to be the most common ways invasive plants, animals, microbes, and other organisms are transported to new habitats.
Most introduced species do not survive extended periods in new habitats, because they do not possess the evolutionary adaptations to adjust to the challenges posed by their new surroundings. Some introduced species may become invasive when they possess a built-in competitive advantage over indigenous species in invaded areas. Under these circumstances, new arrivals can establish breeding populations and thrive, especially if the ecosystem lacks natural predators capable of keeping them in check. The ecological disruption that tends to follow such invasions often reduces the ecosystem’s biodiversity and causes economic harm to people who depend on the ecosystem’s biological resources. Invasive predators may be so adept at capturing prey that prey populations decline over time, and many prey species are eliminated from affected ecosystems. Other invasive species, in contrast, may prevent native species from obtaining food, living space, or other resources. Over time, invading species can effectively replace native ones, often forcing the localized extinction of many native species. Invasive plants and animals may also serve as disease vectors that spread parasites and pathogens that may further disrupt invaded areas.
Since the dawn of life on Earth, species have migrated and colonized new areas. In some cases, migrating species were unable to establish sustainable populations in new habitats and quickly died out. In other cases, they either were incorporated into the existing structure of the ecosystem or were responsible for modifying native food chains by outcompeting native competitors or decimating native prey. One of the most significant species invasions in Earth’s history took place during the Pliocene Epoch (5.3 million to 2.6 million years ago) after the formation of an isthmus connecting North and South America. Numerous predator species migrating from North America to South America are thought to have contributed to the extinction of many of South America’s mammalian species.
Since their emergence, modern humans (Homo sapiens) have played an ever-increasing role in species invasions. As a result of their colonization of all but the most extreme of Earth’s ecosystems and their tendency to transform natural environments into agricultural and urban landscapes, modern humans are among the most successful invasive species. However, humans also contribute substantially to the introduction of different species to new areas. Tens of thousands of years ago, migratory bands of humans were accompanied by parasites, pathogens, and domesticated animals. With the rise of civilization, many exotic plants and animals were brought from distant lands to broaden the palettes of consumers or serve as curiosities in gardens and circuses.
Although the collection and transport of exotic species dates to ancient times, written records of their ecological effects extend back only a few centuries. One of the best-known historical examples of such species is the Norway, or brown, rat (Rattus norvegicus). This rodent, which is believed to have originated in northeastern China, spread throughout the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Since the rat’s accidental introduction during the voyages of exploration between the late 18th and 19th centuries, populations have established themselves on numerous Pacific islands, including Hawaii and New Zealand, where they prey on many native birds, small reptiles, and amphibians. Some other introductions during this time, however, were deliberate: dogs, cats, pigs, and other domesticated animals were taken to new lands, and there they caused the extinction of many other species, including the dodo (Raphus cucullatus) from Mauritius by 1681.
Although invasive species occur on all continents, Australia and Oceania have been particularly hard-hit. The first wave of invasive species arrived in Australia and the islands of the Pacific with European explorers in the form of feral cats and various rat species. European wild rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus), which originally inhabited southern Europe and North Africa, were deliberately introduced into Australia in 1827 to serve as a familiar elements for settlers in a new land, and the rabbits multiplied significantly. Over time, they degraded grazing lands by stripping the bark from native trees and shrubs and consuming their seeds and leaves. The red fox (Vulpes vulpes), a small predator found across much of the Northern Hemisphere, wreaked havoc on marsupials and native rodents since its introduction in the 1850s. Ironically, the red fox was brought to Australia to help control the aforementioned European wild rabbits. The voracious cane toad (Bufo marinus), whose native range spans from northern South America to southern Texas, is a poisonous species with few natural predators. It was introduced into Australia in the 1930s from Hawaii to reduce the effects of beetles on sugarcane plantations. Cane toads are responsible for a variety of ills, such as population declines in native prey species (bees and other small animals), population drops in amphibian species that compete with them, and the poisoning of species that consume them. A large number of invasive plants have also been introduced to Australia. Giant sensitive tree (Mimosa pigra) may have been introduced by the Darwin Botanic Garden sometime before the 1890s; upalatable to most wildlife, it forms vast thickets and disrupts native wetland ecosystems. Cherry guava (Psidium cattleianum), Surinam cherry (Eugenia uniflora), Arabian coffee (Coffea arabica), lantana (Lantana camara), and the ice cream bean (Inga edulis) are all invasive species that were brought as food or ornamental plants and escaped cultivation.
 On Guam, Saipan, and several other Pacific islands, the brown tree snake (Boiga irregularis), a native of Australia and Indonesia, has caused the extinction of several birds, reptiles, and amphibians and two of Guam’s three native bat species since its accidental introduction to these islands in the 1950s. Although the snake may have been brought to the islands to control native rodent populations, it is more likely that the original invaders were stowaways aboard military aircraft and cargo ships.
North American ecosystems have been greatly affected by invasive species over the last two centuries. During the 19th and 20th centuries the Great Lakes region was altered by the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus), a primitive fish indigenous to the coastal waters of the North Atlantic and western Mediterranean Sea. The sea lamprey uses a specially modified sucker to latch onto a game fish and drain its blood. It is thought that the development of the Erie, Welland, and St. Lawrence canal systems allowed the fish to migrate into the Great Lakes. In the 1980s the introduction of the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha), a filter-feeding mollusk, created further ecological and economic disruption. This species is native to the watersheds supplying the Black, Aral, and Caspian seas. Many traveled in the ballast water in oceangoing ships, and they were subsequently released when this water was dumped into the Great Lakes. Large numbers of zebra mussels have been shown to clog water-intake pipes and remove much of the algae from the aquatic ecosystems they inhabit.
Introduced into the United States from Eurasia in the 1970s to help control algae on catfish farms in the Deep South, Asian carp—most notably bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis) and silver carp (H. molitrix)—escaped into the Mississippi River system during flooding episodes in the early 1990s. After establishing self-sustaining populations in the lower Mississippi River, they began to move northward. Although breeding populations have been restricted to the Mississippi River watershed, they could, if they enter the Great Lakes ecosystem, seriously disrupt the food chains of the major lakes and adjoining rivers. Compared with other species of Asian carp, these two pose the greatest danger. They consume large amounts of algae and zooplankton, eating as much as 40 percent of their body weight per day. They are fierce competitors that often push aside native fish to obtain food, and their populations grow rapidly, accounting for 90 percent of the biomass in some stretches of the Mississippi and Illinois rivers.
By 2010 the Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus), a native of Southeast Asia, was challenging the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) for dominance in the wetlands of southern Florida. Released into the Florida landscape after Hurricane Andrew damaged pet stores in 1992, as well as by change-of-heart pet owners, Burmese pythons soon established breeding populations in the state. Growing to nearly 6 metres (20 feet) long, these giant constrictor snakes became significant predators in the area. The python’s penchant for consuming the Key Largo wood rat (Neotoma floridana) and the wood stork (Mycteria americana) have caused both species to decline locally.
Parts of the United States are covered by kudzu (Pueraria montana, variety lobata), a fast-growing vine native to southern and eastern Asia. Kudzu was introduced into North America for erosion control and decorative purposes in the late 19th century; however, it deprives native plants of sunlight. In addition, a large section of the United States is plagued by the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), an aggressive swarming and biting species native to South America. The species may have arrived in the United States in shipments of soil and other landscaping materials.
Some introduced species have a global distribution. Most notable examples in this category are disease-causing microbes. Early European colonists of the New World and the Pacific introduced organisms that cause the common cold, smallpox, sexually transmitted diseases, and other illnesses to lands whose people had no resistance to them. Beginning in the late 1960s, a strain of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS, was first carried by infected humans from Africa to Haiti. Later AIDS would spread to populations across the globe. Global trade and pet trafficking are often blamed for accidental disease outbreaks among other species, such as the worldwide spread of amphibian chytridiomycosis in frogs and other amphibians and possibly even avian influenza (bird flu) and West Nile virus among various organisms.
