IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, also called IUCN Red List,  one of the most well-known objective assessment systems for classifying the status of plants, animals, and other organisms threatened with extinction. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) unveiled this assessment system in 1994. It contains explicit criteria and categories to classify the conservation status of individual species on the basis of their probability of extinction.
The IUCN system uses a set of five quantitative criteria to assess the extinction risk of a given species. In general, these criteria consider:
After a given species has been thoroughly evaluated, it is placed into one of several categories. (The details of each have been condensed to highlight two or three of the category’s most salient points below.) In addition, three of the categories (CR, EN, and VU) are contained within the broader notion of “threatened.” The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species recognizes several categories of species status:
All else being equal, a species experiencing an 90 percent decline over 10 years (or three generations), for example, would be classified as critically endangered. Likewise, another species undergoing a 50 percent decline over the same period would be classified as endangered, and one experiencing a 30 percent reduction over the same time frame would be considered vulnerable. It is important to understand, however, that a species cannot be classified by using one criterion alone; it is essential for the scientist doing the assessment to consider all five criteria when determining the status of the species.
Each year thousands of scientists around the world assess or reassess species. The IUCN Red List is subsequently updated with these new data once the assessments have been checked for accuracy. In this way, the information helps to provide a continual spotlight on the status of the world’s at-risk plants, animals, and other organisms. As a result, interested parties, such as national governments and conservation organizations, may use the information provided in the IUCN Red List to prioritize their own species-protection efforts.
The IUCN Red List brings into focus the ongoing decline of Earth’s biodiversity and the influence humans have on life on the planet. It provides a globally accepted standard with which to measure the conservation status of species over time. By 2019, 96,500 species had been assessed by using the IUCN Red List categories and criteria. Of these, more than 26,500 species of plants, animals, and others fall into the threatened categories (CR, EN, and VU). Today the list appears as an online database available to the public. Scientists can analyze the percentage of species in a given category and how these percentages change over time; they can also analyze the threats and conservation measures that underpin the observed trends.
