Julia Carabias Lillo,  (born Aug. 11, 1954, Mexico City, Mex.), Mexican ecologist and environmentalist who served as Mexico’s secretary of the environment, natural resources, and fisheries from 1994 to 2000.
Carabias earned both bachelor’s (1977) and master’s (1981) degrees in biology from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City. In 1977 she began teaching at UNAM, and in 1981 she became a full professor of science there, concentrating her research on such subjects as rainforest regeneration, environmental restoration, and the use of natural resources. She was asked by the Mexican government in 1982 to coordinate a program to address the low standard of living in Guerrero, one of Mexico’s poorest states, while still accounting for the delicate ecology of the region. With the help of a team of economists and ecologists, Carabias later adapted the successful program to four other areas of Mexico. She served as a member of UNAM’s University Council from 1989 to 1993.
Among the works she coauthored were Manejo de recursos naturales y pobreza rural (1994; “Handling Natural Resources and Rural Poverty”), Areas naturales prioritarias para la conservación en la región II (1997; “Region II’s Priority Natural Areas for Conservation”), and Desarrollo sustentable (1999; “Sustainable Development”). She coauthored For Earth’s Sake for the UN Conference on Environment and Development, held in Brazil in 1992. Carabias entered government service in early 1994 as president of Mexico’s National Institute of Ecology. She was a member of the advisory council for the National Conservation Fund and in late 1994 became secretary of fisheries. A month later the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources, and Fisheries was formed, and she became secretary, a position she held until late 2000.
In June 2000 she arranged a meeting of officials from Mexico and the United States to work on the problem of restoring natural water flows to the Rio Grande, and she helped create an international task force to deal with a water crisis in the middle section of that river. In addition, she played an important role in enforcing the environmental provisions of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Upon completion of her term as secretary, she returned to UNAM to head the master’s program in restoration ecology.
In January 2001 the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) awarded the J. Paul Getty Wildlife Conservation Prize to Carabias. The WWF commended Carabias for her efforts to promote public participation in the development of environmental policy. During her term as secretary, she had doubled the size of the country’s protected-area system to more than 6 percent of the total area of the country and thereby safeguarded such species as the gray whale (Eschrichtius robustus) and the pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) of Baja California and the manatee (Trichechus manatus) and jaguar (Panthera onca) of Yucatán. After receiving the WWF prize, Carabias donated the $100,000 cash portion of it to the protection of the Chajul region of southern Mexico’s Lacandon forests.
From 2001 to 2004 Carabias served on the board of directors of Resources for the Future, an international environmental research organization, and from 2002 to 2004 she served as chair of the Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel of the Global Environment Facility. She was awarded the International Cosmos Prize in 2004 and in 2005 received the United Nations Environmental Programme Champions of the Earth Prize.
