Ordovician-Silurian extinction,  global extinction event occurring during the Hirnantian Age (445.2 million to 443.8 million years ago) of the Ordovician Period and the subsequent Rhuddanian Age (443.8 million to 440.8 million years ago) of the Silurian Period that eliminated an estimated 85 percent of all Ordovician species. This extinction interval ranks second in severity to the one that occurred at the boundary between the Permian and Triassic periods about 251 million years ago in terms of the percentage of marine families affected. The Ordovician-Silurian extinction was almost twice as severe as the K–T extinction event that occurred at the end of the Cretaceous Period, about 66 million years ago, which is famous for bringing an end to the dinosaurs.
Brachiopods display the effects of this extinction well. Laurentian brachiopods were hit hard, particularly those that lived in the broad and shallow seas both within and near the continent. Many of these brachiopods were endemic (confined to a particular region) to Laurentia, as opposed to the more cosmopolitan (globally distributed) forms that lived at the edges of the continent. Following the extinction, Laurentian seas were repopulated with brachiopod genera previously found only on other continents. As a result, Silurian brachiopods were far more widely distributed than their Ordovician predecessors. Other groups of organisms—including conodonts, acritarchs (a catchall group of various small microfossils), bryozoans, and trilobites—that showed this pattern of regional, but not global, distribution were similarly affected by this extinction event. Despite the intensity of the extinction and the loss of many endemic species, Silurian ecosystems were remarkably similar to those in the Ordovician.
The extinction appears to have occurred in several phases. Some paleontologists suggest that an early phase affecting graptolites, brachiopods, and trilobites took place prior to the end of the Ordovician Period, before the major fall in sea level occurred, and it may have been caused by falling carbon dioxide levels associated with the erosion of silicate rocks, which may have triggered a global cooling phase. Most paleontologists, however, acknowledge that glaciation over the African and South American portions of Gondwana and the resulting fall in sea levels and changes to ocean current patterns were major disruptions to climates and habitats. The drop in sea level would have drained the large epicontinental seas and reduced the available habitat for organisms that favoured those settings. In many areas the interval of glaciation was accompanied by the invasion of cool-water brachiopod fauna even into tropical latitudes, suggesting the onset of significant global cooling. A third phase of extinction occurred with the rise of sea level owing to global warming and retreating glaciers that took place during the Rhuddanian Age of the Silurian Period. No concentration of iridium has been identified near the extinction that would suggest a bolide (meteorite or comet) impact like the one identified at the end of the Cretaceous Period.
