Population pyramid,  graphical representation of the age and sex composition of a specific population. The age and sex structure of the population determines the ultimate shape of a population pyramid, such that the representation may take the form of a pyramid, have a columnar shape (with vertical sides rather than sloped sides), or have an irregular profile.
In a population pyramid, the size of the population under investigation is depicted on the horizontal axis, and age is aligned on the vertical axis. The result is a series of bars stacked on top of one another, each representing an age category (typically in 5-year age groups), with the youngest age group represented by the bottom bar and the oldest age group by the uppermost bar. The horizontal length of each bar represents the number of individuals in the specific age group for the population depicted. The age groups that correspond to each bar are displayed along the central axis or along one side or both sides of the graph. Often the years of birth for each age category are also displayed on the graph. To maintain proportionality, the age groups are the same size (e.g., 1-year, 5-year, or 10-year age groups), and the bars are all of equal height. The age (vertical) axis is often truncated at the age group 80 to 84, depending on the data available for the population depicted. For some populations, data for the older age groups are incomplete or inaccurate or there are few people in the older age categories. Population pyramids intended for comparison should be drawn to the same scale and should depict the same age categories.
The population pyramid can be used to represent additional characteristics of a population, such as marital status, race, or geographic location. In this case the bar for each age-sex group is further subdivided to represent the additional categories. The formatting system used to depict the additional categories should be applied consistently throughout the graph, and the same sequence should be used on either side of the vertical axis, in mirror image form. For example, if race is depicted and the categories are white, black, and other, the categories would be arranged in the same sequence for males and for females, working outward from each side of the central axis.
The shape of the population pyramid efficiently communicates considerable information about the age-sex structure of a specific population. A broad-based pyramid indicates that people in the younger age categories make up a relatively large proportion of the population, and a narrow or pointed top indicates that older people make up a relatively small proportion of the population. In the older age groups of many populations, the number of females is much greater than the number of males; this is reflected in the shape of the pyramid, such that the bars on the right side of the central axis (the female side) are longer than those on the left (male) side. The median age of the population would be the age group (bar) represented by the point on the vertical axis that equally divides the area within the pyramid (equal areas within the pyramid fall above and below the age represented by the bar).
Fertility and mortality of the population are also reflected in the shape of the population pyramid. A broad base and sharply tapering sides (a true pyramid shape) reflects high fertility rates and high mortality rates in younger age groups. Irregularities in the profile of the population pyramid convey information about changes in the population or aberrations. A bulge or an indentation in the profile of the population pyramid may indicate unusually high fertility or mortality or changes in the population due to immigration or emigration.
Demographers who have studied the historical changes in age and sex composition, fertility, and mortality of the world’s populations have articulated a theory of demographic transition. This theory provides a useful approximation of the historical changes that have taken place in populations in many different regions of the world. The stages of this transition are represented by dramatically different population pyramids. 
Stage 1, for example, is represented by a sharply tapering pyramid sitting on a broad base, reflecting high fertility and high mortality rates among the younger age groups. Limited by high mortality, the population increases slowly and remains relatively small. The shape of the population pyramid for Stage 2 of the demographic transition reflects a reduction in mortality, especially among the youngest age groups, coupled with high fertility; the population increases rapidly but remains relatively young. The population pyramid that represents Stage 3 in the demographic transition has nearly vertical sides, with a broad base and relatively broad peak, reflecting reduced fertility, reduced childhood mortality, and increased survival; the older age categories make up a larger proportion of the population than in earlier stages, and the size of the population stabilizes.
