recycling,  recovery and reprocessing  of waste materials for use in new products. The basic phases in recycling are the collection of waste materials, their processing or manufacture into new products, and the purchase of those products, which may then themselves be recycled. Typical materials that are recycled include iron and steel scrap, aluminum cans, glass bottles, paper, wood, and plastics. The materials reused in recycling serve as substitutes for  raw materials obtained from  such increasingly scarce natural resources as petroleum, natural gas, coal, mineral ores, and trees. Recycling can help reduce the quantities of solid waste deposited in landfills, which have become increasingly expensive. Recycling also reduces  the pollution of air, water, and land resulting from  waste disposal.
There are two broad types of recycling  operations: internal and external. Internal  recycling is the reuse in a manufacturing process of materials that are a waste product of that process. Internal recycling is common in the metals industry, for example. The manufacture of copper tubing results in a certain amount of waste in the form of tube ends and trimmings; this material is remelted and recast. Another form of internal recycling is seen in the distilling industry, in which, after the distillation, spent grain mash is dried and processed into an edible foodstuff for cattle.
External  recycling is the reclaiming of materials from a product that has been worn out or rendered obsolete. An example of external recycling is the collection of old newspapers and magazines for repulping and their manufacture into new paper products. Aluminum cans and glass bottles are other examples of everyday objects that are externally recycled on a wide scale. These materials can be  collected by any of three main methods: buy-back centres, which purchase  waste materials that have been sorted and brought in by consumers;  drop-off centres, where consumers can deposit waste materials but are not paid  for them; and curbside collection, in which homes and businesses sort their waste materials and deposit them by the curb for collection by a central agency.
Society’s choice of whether and how much to recycle depends basically on economic factors. Conditions of affluence and the presence of cheap raw materials encourage human beings’ tendency to simply discard used materials. Recycling becomes economically attractive when the cost of reprocessing waste or recycled material is  less than the cost of treating and disposing of the materials or of processing new raw materials.
