Shadow biosphere,  hypothetical life-supporting system on Earth, consisting of microorganisms of unique or unusual molecular structure and biochemical properties and representing the possibility that life on Earth originated more than once. The unusual biochemical nature of theoretical shadow biosphere life-forms has led some scientists to describe these forms alternatively as “nonstandard,” or “weird,” life, distinguishing them from the known, or “standard,” organisms—the entities that make up the known domains of standard life—Eukarya, Archaea, and Bacteria.
All standard life shares a common biochemical architecture that is based on the need for phosphorus, which is used to build genetic material—in the form of either RNA or DNA. The pervasive use of this chemical element by life on Earth has led to the conclusion that the ability to metabolize phosphate-containing molecules was a requirement for the origin and evolution of life. The shadow biosphere hypothesis, which gained support in the first decade of the 21st century, challenged this notion, in large part because of the likelihood that there exist many more microorganisms, perhaps of significant diversity, than have been described. In addition, the detection of nonstandard life had not been pursued by many scientists, and hence proponents of the shadow biosphere hypothesis argued that the existence of organisms with atypical biochemical attributes could not be ruled out. The shadow biosphere could have preceded or even coexisted with a biosphere of phosphate-dependent microorganisms. If this were the case, then life on Earth theoretically could have originated more than once. Such a scenario also suggests that phosphate-based life gained an evolutionary advantage that enabled it to become the most widespread type of life on the planet.
If a shadow biosphere once existed on Earth, then its microorganisms presumably left traces of their presence. Such traces may exist in the form of unusual biochemical markers in rocks or minerals. However, the shadow biosphere may also be extant. Indeed, a group of unique microorganisms living in Mono Lake in California could be representatives of an extant shadow biosphere. These microorganisms derive their energy from arsenic, concentrations of which are extraordinarily high in the lake. Because arsenic is very similar to phosphorus, can form biomolecules spontaneously, and may have been present in the oxygen-deprived environments of deep oceans on early Earth, researchers have speculated that arsenic-rich habitats similar to the one at Mono Lake formed a type of shadow biosphere.
Investigations into the shadow biosphere hypothesis could help explain the existence of microorganisms that inhabit extreme environments, that exhibit extreme features, or that may exist in extraterrestrial environments.
See also extremophile; extraterrestrial life; astrobiology.
