The Greens, also called Green Party,  any of various environmentalist or ecological-oriented political parties that formed beginning in the 1970s. An umbrella organization known as the European Greens was founded in Brussels, Belg., in January 1984 to coordinate the activities of the various European parties. Green representatives sit in the European Parliament as part of the Greens/European Free Alliance.
The first and most successful national party known as the Greens (die Grünen) was founded in West Germany by Herbert Gruhl, Petra Kelly, and others in 1979 and arose out of the merger of about 250 ecological and environmentalist groups. The party sought to organize public support for the control of nuclear energy and of air and water pollution. The Greens became a national party in 1980. The program that they adopted called for the dismantling of both the Warsaw Pact and NATO, the demilitarization of Europe, and the breaking up of large economic enterprises into smaller units, among other proposals. This program attracted many members of the left wing of the Social Democratic Party into the Greens’ ranks. The Greens won a sprinkling of seats in various Land (state) elections from 1979 on, and in 1983 they won a 5.6 percent share of the vote in national elections to the Bundestag (Federal Diet), thereby achieving their first representation in that legislative chamber. The Greens experienced almost constant ideological tensions between its left wing and a more pragmatic faction. Its members were largely well-educated young people, but the party drew considerable support from voters concerned about local or regional environmental and other issues.
By the end of the 1980s almost every country in western and northern Europe had a party known as the Greens or by some similar name (e.g., Green List in Italy, Green Alliance in Ireland and Finland, Green Alternatives in Austria, Green Ecology Party in Sweden, Ecologist Party in Belgium). Green parties also developed in such countries as Canada, Argentina, Chile, and New Zealand. Australia’s Greens coalesced as a national party in 1992, after some two decades as an active political presence in Tasmania. After the revolutions of 1989, Green parties or groups began to emerge in eastern Europe. In 1999 Greens in the European Parliament formed a bloc with the European Free Alliance, whose representatives advocate for national groups that lack their own state and for other minority groups.
