Thermal-heat recovery, also called waste-heat recovery,  use of heat energy that is released from some industrial processes and that would otherwise dissipate into the immediate environment unused. Given the prevalence of heat-generating processes in energy systems, such as those found in household heating and cooling systems and in electricity generation, thermal-heat recovery has a wide area of potential applications and can reduce fossil-fuel consumption. However, although sources of waste heat are ubiquitous, not all waste heat is suitable for thermal-heat recovery, and economic or technical constraints sometimes preclude the use of available recovery technologies.
In many heat- and electricity-generating processes, after the heat demand of the process has been met, any excess or waste heat is released as exhaust. Since the laws of thermodynamics indicate that heat is transferred from higher to lower temperatures, the temperature of a process’s waste heat is thus inevitably lower than the temperature of the process itself. In determining the feasibility for heat recovery, the two most-crucial factors are the temperature of the waste heat and the quantity of heat produced. The heat-flux density (the rate of heat flow per cross-sectional area), the nature of the environment, the temperature of the heat, and process-specific considerations—such as the rate of cooling, which must be controllable in some industrial processes such as glass manufacture—also affect the suitability of waste heat for recovery. Generally speaking, the higher the temperature is, the more suitable the heat is for generating electricity (as opposed to being used directly).
Heat loss from a process occurs through three main mechanisms: electromagnetic radiation; convection, which is the transmission of energy through thermal currents in fluids; and conduction, which is the direct transmission of heat through a substance. Thermal-heat-recovery technologies employ one or a combination of those mechanisms in order to recover waste heat.
Heat exchangers are a widely used technology that enables the transfer of heat energy between hot and cold fluid streams and can be classified into three main types: recuperators, regenerators, and evaporative-heat exchangers. Recuperators operate continuously and transfer heat between fluids on either side of a dividing wall. Regenerators allow the transfer of heat to and from an absorbent medium, such as heat-conducting bricks. Regenerators operate periodically and feature a loading phase during which hot fluid charges the device and an unloading phase during which the heat is transferred to a cooler fluid. Evaporative-heat exchangers are frequently used in power-station cooling towers and use evaporation to cool a liquid in the same space as the coolant.
Heat exchangers are used extensively in fossil-fuel and nuclear power plants, gas turbines, and the chemical industry as well as in heating, air-conditioning, and refrigeration units. Recovered heat may be used directly for preheating raw materials, in drying operations, for making steam, and in space and water heating. Generating electricity from waste heat is often more favourable than directly using recovered heat because of the versatility and relatively high value of electricity compared with heat. Electricity can be used for power as well as heat applications, and it can be transported more efficiently than heat. Although high-temperature sources of waste heat are necessary to generate electricity at conventional power plants, it is possible to produce electricity at lower temperatures with nonconventional cycles such as the organic Rankine cycle. That cycle uses an organic working fluid with a low boiling point so that the evaporation occurs at a much lower temperature. The cooler waste heat is thus still able to produce a vapour to drive a turbine and generate electricity.
Other technologies relevant to thermal-heat recovery include heat pumps and heat pipes. Heat pumps are simple thermodynamic machines in which low-temperature heat from a source is transferred to a higher-temperature sink, using mechanical or high-temperature heat energy. In industry, there are several applications in which it is desirable to pump low-temperature waste heat into a higher-temperature environment. In the domestic sector, ground or air source heat pumps upgrade ambient sources of heat to temperatures suitable for domestic heating. Heat pipes enable the transfer of heat over moderate distances with a very low heat loss and without the need for mechanical pumping. Those may be used in combination with combined heat and power systems in order to transport the heat to district heating schemes or adjacent industrial facilities.
In practice, the application of thermal-heat-recovery technologies requires a use for the recovered energy, which often entails significant investment in electricity-generation capabilities if the heat cannot be used directly. Additionally, some heat exchangers need regular maintenance because of the corrosive gases in exhaust streams or require specialized materials to withstand the high temperatures, which can be costly and render the plant uneconomic.
