Tragedy of the commons,  concept highlighting the conflict between individual and collective rationality.
The idea of the tragedy of the commons was made popular by the American ecologist Garrett Hardin, who used the analogy of ranchers grazing their animals on a common field. When the field is not over capacity, ranchers may graze their animals with few limitations. However, the rational rancher will seek to add livestock, thereby increasing profits. Thinking logically but not collectively, the benefits of adding animals adhere to the rancher alone, while the costs are shared. The tragedy is that ultimately no rancher will be able to graze the field, due to overconsumption. This scenario is played out on a daily basis in numerous instances, having grave consequences for the world’s resources.
It is commonly recognized that one of the primary roles of government at the local, state, national, and international levels is to define and manage shared resources. However, there are a number of practical problems associated with this. Management inside clear political boundaries is a relatively straightforward task, but more problematic are resources shared across jurisdictions. For example, neighbouring cities may seek to maximize their benefits by competing for industry, but they may minimize their costs by pushing residents outside their jurisdictions. Another dimension is added at the international level when states are not bound by a common authority and may view restrictions on resource extraction as a threat to their sovereignty. Additional difficulties arise when resources cannot be divided or are interrelated, such as in whale hunting treaties when the fishing of the whales’ food source is separately regulated.
The mechanisms to resolve these tragedies are part of a larger set of theories dealing with social dilemmas in fields such as mathematics, economics, sociology, urban planning, and environmental sciences. In these arenas, scholars have identified and structured a number of tentative solutions, such as enclosing the commons by establishing property rights, regulating through government intervention, or developing strategies to trigger collective behaviour. The American political scientist Elinor Ostrom, who was a cowinner of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences, argued that these strategies generally deal with problems of commitment and problems of mutual monitoring.
As the world’s population rises and demands more access to resources, the issues associated with the commons become more severe. Ultimately, this may test the role and practicality of nation-states, leading to a redefinition of international governance. Among other important questions to consider is the proper role of supranational governments, such as the United Nations and the World Trade Organization. As resources become more limited, some argue, managing the commons may have neither a technical nor a political solution. This, indeed, may be the ultimate tragedy.
