veld, (Afrikaans: “field”)  name given to various types of open country in Southern Africa that is used for pasturage and farmland. To most South African farmers today the “veld” refers to the land they work, much of which has long since ceased to be “natural.”
Various types of veld may be discerned, depending upon local characteristics such as elevation, cultivation, and climate. Thus, there is a high veld, a middle veld, a low veld, a bush veld, a thorn veld, and a grass veld. The boundary between these different varieties of veld is frequently vague, and all of them are usually referred to with the general term veld by the local inhabitants. For convenience, its major regions—Highveld, Middleveld, and Lowveld—are distinguished on the basis of elevation.
The Highveld comprises most of the high-plateau country of Southern Africa. Except in Lesotho, where it extends well above 8,200 feet (2,500 metres) and even above 11,000 feet (3,400 metres) in places, all of it lies between 4,000 and 6,000 feet (1,200 and 1,800 metres) above sea level. The South African part of the region is bounded to the east and south by the Great Escarpment, which consists of the Drakensberg and Cape ranges, and by the Lesotho Highlands. Its less clearly defined northern and western boundaries coincide roughly with the 4,000-foot contour. Most of it is underlain by sedimentary strata of the Karoo System (or Karoo Super Group), dating from  about 345 to 190 million years ago, and to older pre-Karoo material. Among these are coal-bearing strata. These materials have been eroded over a long period of time to produce generally flat plains, dissected occasionally by deeply carved valleys and including relict mountains and scattered steep-sided hills called kopjes, or koppies. The Highveld plains are thought to have been created by pedimentation, in which the areas around resistant rock are eroded away, leaving mountains of low relief and kopjes. Large areas of the western part of the region are also covered by “pans,” which are shallow and ephemeral lakes, often with salty crusts; these are found especially in several provinces in South Africa.
In Zimbabwe the Highveld coincides roughly with the region lying on either side of the central watershed. Like the Highveld of South Africa, it has a remarkably even surface, broken only by kopjes and low ridges. Throughout the Highveld, soils tend to be thin, poor, and powdery and thus easily carried away by both wind and water erosion.
The Middleveld is the name given in South Africa to a vast and geologically complex region that lies in the region north of Pretoria, in the Northern Cape province, and in Namibia. Its boundaries are not as well defined as are those for the Highveld, but generally it lies at an altitude between 2,000 and 4,000 feet (600 and 1,200 metres) above sea level. In Zimbabwe to the northeast, the Middleveld also consists of the land lying roughly between 2,000 and 4,000 feet. Most of the Middleveld is underlain by Precambrian rocks that have been exposed by erosion. In northern South Africa it is underlain by the unique Bushveld complex, with its wealth of rare minerals. As is the case in the Highveld, the uniformity of the relief is broken by relict mountains and by kopjes. Pans are numerous, especially in the western areas. Middleveld soils are generally thin and poor.
The Lowveld is the name given to two areas that lie at an elevation of between 500 and 2,000 feet (150 and 600 metres) above sea level. One area is in the South African provinces of Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal and parts of Swaziland, and the other is in southeastern Zimbabwe. Both are underlain largely by the soft sediments and basaltic lavas of the Karoo System and by loose gravels. They have been extensively intruded by granites. Other resistant metamorphic rocks also occur; these commonly appear as low ridges or what seem to be archipelagoes of island mountains. The higher western margins of both areas testify to the degree of erosion resulting from the flow of rivers running east or southeast.
The soils of the Lowveld are more varied than those of the other veld regions. Along their higher and wetter western sides, they tend to be deep, leached (percolated by water), acidic, porous, and well-drained. In the lower-lying and drier central and eastern portions, they tend to be shallow, but they are more fertile and retain moisture better.
The climate of the veld is highly variable, but its general pattern is mild winters from May to September and hot or very hot summers from November to March, with moderate or considerable variations in daily temperatures and abundant sunshine. Precipitation mostly occurs in the summer months in the form of high-energy thunderstorms.
Over most of the South African Highveld, the average annual rainfall is between 15 and 30 inches (380 and 760 mm), decreasing to about 10 inches (250 mm) near the western border and increasing to nearly 40 inches (1,000 mm) in some parts of the Lesotho Highlands; the South African Lowveld generally receives more precipitation than the Highveld. Temperature is closely related to elevation. In general, the mean July (winter) temperatures range between 45 °F (7 °C) in the Lesotho Highlands and 60 °F (16 °C) in the Lowveld. January (summer) temperatures range between 65 °F (18 °C) and 80 °F (27 °C).
In Zimbabwe the precipitation averages around 30 to 35 inches (760 to 900 mm) on the Highveld, dropping to less than 15 inches in the lowest areas of the Lowveld. Temperatures are slightly higher than in South Africa.
Over the entire veld, seasonal and annual average rainfall variations of up to 40 percent are common. Damaging drought afflicts at least half the area about once every three or four years. Everywhere the average number of hours of annual sunshine varies from 60 to 80 percent of the total amount possible.
