Wrangell–Saint Elias National Park and Preserve,   vast natural area in southeastern Alaska, U.S., on the Canadian border, adjoining Kluane National Park and Reserve in Yukon. Proclaimed a national monument in 1978, the area was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979 and was established as a national park and preserve in 1980. It is the largest unit in the U.S. national park system: the national park has an area of 13,005 square miles (33,683 square km), and the national preserve has an area of 7,582 square miles (19,637 square km), for a total area of 20,587 square miles (53,320 square km). The park is centred on the convergence of the Chugach, Wrangell, and St. Elias mountain ranges and includes the largest assemblage of glaciers and the greatest collection of peaks above 16,000 feet (4,880 metres) on the North American continent. Mount St. Elias, at 18,008 feet (5,489 metres), is the second highest peak in the United States.
The Chugach Mountains, located along the park’s southwestern boundary and near the Pacific coast, are the site of the 80-mile- (130-km-) long Bagley Ice Field. Spawning several large glaciers, it is the largest subpolar ice field in North America. To the north of the Chugach Mountains, the braided Chitina River flows northwestward to drain into the Copper River, which in turn empties southward along the park’s western border into the Gulf of Alaska. Crossing the central part of the park from northwest to southeast are the volcanic Wrangell Mountains (northwest) and the St. Elias Mountains (southeast). Mount Wrangell, which rises to 14,163 feet (4,317 metres), last showed signs of volcanic activity in 1900, when vents of steam appeared near its summit. The Nabesna Glacier, one of the continent’s longest, extends northward out of the Wrangell Mountains. The St. Elias Mountains also contain glaciers. The Malaspina Glacier, some 40 miles (65 km) wide and 1,500 feet (460 metres) thick, is the largest piedmont glacier in North America; it flows out of the St. Elias Mountains in the southeastern part of the park.
The park’s vegetation consists largely of coastal spruce-hemlock forests, floodplain spruce and deciduous forests, and alpine sedges and grasses. Wildlife includes caribou, brown and grizzly bears, Dall sheep, moose, wolves, beavers, trumpeter swans and other waterfowl, and marine mammals. Access to the interior of the park is by two roads, one in the north and one in the south, and by aircraft. The southern road through the Chitina River valley allows access to McCarthy and the ruins of the Kennecott copper mines. The park is the scene of such wilderness-oriented activities as backpacking, hunting, fishing, river running, and mountaineering.
