Bunyavirus,  any virus belonging to the family Bunyaviridae. Bunyaviruses have enveloped virions (virus particles) that are about 80–120 nm (1 nm = 10−9 metre) in diameter. The nucleocapsid (consisting of a protein shell, or capsid, and viral nucleic acids) is helical and elongated. The bunyavirus genome is made up of three segments (large, medium, and small) containing single-stranded negative-sense RNA (ribonucleic acid). The genome encodes an endogenous RNA polymerase enzyme that is used to transcribe the negative-sense RNA into positive-sense RNA, which can then be used for the translation, or synthesis, of proteins.
The bunyavirus family contains five genera: Orthobunyavirus, Phlebovirus, Nairovirus, Tospovirus, and Hantavirus. Most of these viruses are transmitted by arthropods (e.g., ticks, mosquitoes, and sand flies) and cause serious human disease, including certain types of viral hemorrhagic fever.
Hantaviruses, well-characterized members of Bunyaviridae, can cause acute respiratory illness in humans. The hantaviruses are evolutionarily adapted to a specific rodent host, and thus rodents, including rats and mice, act as viral reservoirs. Human infection occurs following unusual or intense contact with infected rodent populations. The virus is transmitted primarily through the inhalation of dust that contains dried rodent excreta.
Schmallenberg virus, which belongs to Orthobunyavirus, causes congenital malformations and stillbirths in ruminants, including cattle and sheep. It was first isolated in 2011, when a mysterious illness characterized by diarrhea, fever, and reduced milk production struck dairy cattle in Germany. Its primary vector appears to be midges.
Cat Que virus was first isolated in 2004 from mosquitoes and children with viral encephalitis in northern Vietnam. It was later found circulating in domestic pigs in China. Cat Que virus is transmitted primarily by Culex mosquitoes, with pigs serving as a natural host. In humans, the virus can cause fever and viral encephalitis.
