Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),  virus of the Herpesviridae family that is the major cause of acute infectious mononucleosis, a common syndrome characterized by fever, sore throat, extreme fatigue, and swollen lymph glands.
Epstein-Barr virus was first reported by British scientists M.A. Epstein, Y.M. Barr, and B.G. Achong, who found viruslike particles in cells grown from tissues involved with a newly described lymphatic cancer. The Epstein-Barr virus is known to be able to infect only two different types of cells in the body: some salivary gland cells and one special type of white blood cell (leukocyte). Virus that infects the salivary gland cell is carried into the mouth in the stream of saliva, which is the only bodily fluid that has been proved to contain infectious EBV particles. The type of white blood cell called the B lymphocyte can also carry Epstein-Barr virus. These highly specialized cells manufacture antibodies to help fight infections. Within the salivary gland the virus growth cycle is completed, and infectious virus particles are generated; within the B lymphocytes, however, the virus growth cycle is abortive, and the EBV persists in the B lymphocyte in a partially replicated state for the life of the cell. Even though the virus growth in the B cell is incomplete, the lymphocyte is permanently altered by the infectious process—i.e., B cells can take on growth characteristics that resemble those of cancerous lymphocytes. The affected B lymphocytes can multiply excessively to produce a cancer of the lymphatic system.
In less-developed nations, infection with EBV occurs in almost all children before the age of five and is not associated with recognizable symptoms. In industrialized nations, about half of the population successfully avoids EBV infection through their late teens or early 20s. When EBV infection is delayed until the teenage or early adult years, the body seems to respond to it differently. In about two-thirds of these cases, infection is asymptomatic or very mild. In the remaining one-third of the cases, infection causes mononucleosis.
Other rare disorders have also been linked with Epstein-Barr virus. These include the African lymphoid cancer called Burkitt lymphoma; nasopharyngeal carcinoma, a cancer of the nasal sinuses and throat that is common in southern China, Southeast Asia, and northern Africa and among Eskimos; and certain neurological illnesses, including encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and paralyses of various nerve groups (for example, Bell palsy, which affects the facial nerve).
There are no specific treatments for any form of EBV infection, and no vaccines have yet been developed.
