induced pluripotent stem cell (iPS cell),  immature cell that is generated from an adult (mature) cell and that has regained the capacity to differentiate into any type of cell in the body. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) differ from embryonic stem cells (ES cells), which form the inner cell mass of an embryo but also are pluripotent, eventually giving rise to all the cell types that make up the body. Induced pluripotent cells were first described in 2006 by Japanese physician and researcher Shinya Yamanaka and colleagues. The first experiments were performed by using mouse cells. The following year, however, Yamanaka successfully derived iPS cells from human adult fibroblast cells. Until that time, human stem cells could be obtained only by isolating them from early human embryos. Hence, an important feature of iPS cells is that their generation does not require an embryo, the use of which is fraught with ethical issues.
The generation of iPS cells from somatic cells (fully differentiated adult cells, excluding germ cells) was based on the idea that any cell in the body can be “reprogrammed” to a more primitive (stemlike) state. Among the first to discover that possibility was British developmental biologist John B. Gurdon, who in the late 1950s had shown in frogs that egg cells are able to reprogram differentiated cell nuclei. Gurdon used a technique known as somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), in which the nucleus of a somatic cell is transferred into the cytoplasm of an enucleated egg (an egg that has had its nucleus removed). In 1996 British developmental biologist Ian Wilmut and colleagues used SCNT to create Dolly the sheep, the first clone of an adult mammal. The experiments with SCNT were crucial to the eventual production of iPS cells. Indeed, by the time of Dolly’s creation, it was widely accepted that factors in the egg cytoplasm were responsible for reprogramming differentiated cell nuclei. The factors controlling the process were unknown, however, until Yamanaka published his first report describing iPS cell generation. (Yamanaka and Gurdon shared the 2012 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for their discoveries.)
Several proteins have been identified that are capable of inducing or enhancing pluripotency in nonpluripotent (i.e., adult) cells. Of key importance are the transcription factors Oct-4 (octamer 4) and Sox-2 (sex-determining region Y box 2), which maintain stem cells in a primitive state. Other proteins that may be used to enhance pluripotency include Klf-4 (Kruppel-like factor 4), Nanog, and Glis1 (Glis family zinc finger 1).
Pluripotency factors can be introduced into nonpluripotent cells in different ways, such as by plasmids or delivery as proteins or modified RNAs. Among the most effective and widely used methods, however, is delivery via a retroviral vector. Retroviral vectors can readily enter cells, making the genes they carry accessible to the cell; other retroviral activities are silenced. However, because retroviruses integrate into the nuclear genome, their use raises the risk of virus-induced tumour formation. Nonetheless, retroviral delivery remains highly effective, and technical advances to prevent the integration of retroviral material into the nuclear genome have allowed for the generation of iPS cells via ectopic expression (in the cytoplasm) of retrovirus-delivered transcription factors. Ectopic expression also has been achieved with the use of recombinant adeno-associated virus.
Since the initial development of iPS cells, researchers have been working to improve the techniques and to learn what drives pluripotent stem cells to differentiate in particular ways. They also have been investigating the use of iPS cells in the treatment of certain diseases. Of significance is the potential to create patient-specific iPS cells (using a patient’s own adult cells), which could allow for the generation of perfectly matched cells and tissues for transplantation therapies. Such therapies could help overcome the risk of immune rejection, which is a major challenge in regenerative medicine.
Researchers also have used iPS cells to generate human blastoids, or three-dimensional blastocyst-like structures. The blastoids recapitulated many of the events of the first 10 days of human embryonic development, enabling researchers to investigate the span of human development immediately preceding implantation and providing new opportunities for understanding pregnancy and pregnancy loss.
