Adorno Family,  Genoese family prominent in the politics of that city’s “popular” (democratic) dogeship (1339–1528), when the old aristocracy was exiled and new families seized power. Branches of the family became prominent in Flanders and Spain.
They acceded to real power in the 14th century when a revolution ended the rule of the old nobility in Genoa and eventually inaugurated that of two families, the Adorno and the Fregoso, who contended for the office of doge for a century and a half. The Adorno contributed six doges to the Republic of Genoa. Gabriele, elected in 1363, served for seven years, was named imperial vicar by the Holy Roman emperor Charles IV in 1368, and was driven from power two years later by an uprising led by Domenico Fregoso. Eight years later the Adorno returned to office with Antoniotto I (d. 1397), who was alternately ousted and reinstated until he was elected doge by a large majority in 1394. Rising factional strife, however, forced him to turn the city over to King Charles VI of France.
Another Adorno doge, Agostino (served 1487–99), a faithful supporter of the Sforza dukes of Milan, relinquished his office when Louis XII of France conquered Milan. His son Antoniotto II came to power during the stormy early 16th century, ruling the city briefly in 1513 as vicar of the king of France, later transferring his allegiance to Spain, and becoming doge in 1522, when the marchese di Pescara took Genoa for the Holy Roman emperor Charles V. Antoniotto’s five-year rule ended in 1527, when Genoa was conquered by Andrea Doria for Francis I of France. Antoniotto retired to Milan, while Doria quarreled with the French king and recaptured Genoa for Charles V.
A line of the Adorno in Flanders, founded by Obizzo (d. 1307), a crusader in the forces of Comte Guy de Dampierre, established itself in Bruges. Pietro (d. 1409) served as treasurer of the commune of Bruges, and his sons Giacomo and Pietro established in Bruges in 1428 the Church of Jerusalem, a replica of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. Anselmo, son of the second Pietro, was treasurer of Bruges, traveled in Syria and Africa, and served as ambassador to Iran for Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy, and as counselor to King James II of Scotland. In Spain another branch of the family produced many soldiers and admirals.
In 1463 Giuliano Adorno married Caterina Fieschi (d. 1510), a member of another famous Genoese family, who was canonized in 1737 as St. Catherine of Genoa.
