ʿAnnazid dynasty, also called Banū ʿAnnāz or Banū ʿAyyār,  Kurdish dynasty (c. 990/991–1117) that ruled territory on what is now the Iran-Iraq frontier in the central Zagros Mountain region, with major centres that included Dīnawar, Shahrazūr, and Kermānshāh. The ʿAnnazids oversaw a general period of political instability and, later supplanted by Oghuz Turkmen, were the last major Kurdish dynasty to rule in the central Zagros region.
The dynasty, which had its base of power in the Kurdish Shādhanjān clan, was founded by Abū al-Fatḥ Muḥammad ibn ʿAnnāz (died 1010). During his rule, which spanned 20 years, conflict with neighbouring groups—including the Ḥasanwayhid (Ḥasanūyid) dynasty, another Kurdish dynasty, as well as the rival Arab Mazyadid (Banū Mazyad) and ʿUqaylid (Banū ʿUqayl) dynasties—was frequent. The ʿAnnazids under Abū al-Fatḥ were affiliated with the local Būyid rulers, who, with their power weakening, were obliged to seek support among Kurdish allies. In 1006 Abū al-Fatḥ faced an offensive launched by the Ḥasanwayhid ruler Badr ibn Ḥasanwayh and his Mazyadid allies; Abū al-Fatḥ sought shelter with his Būyid allies in Baghdad, and in a subsequent treaty he submitted to Ḥasanwayhid vassalage.
Following his death in 1010, Abū al-Fatḥ was succeeded by his son, Ḥusām al-Dawlah Abū al-Shawk Fāris (died 1046), although two other sons independently ruled the urban centres of Shahrazūr and Bandanījīn. Abū al-Shawk’s 36-year rule spanned a period of internal and external conflict, yet it was under Abū al-Shawk that the dynasty reached its peak—in large part because of the internecine strife dividing its Ḥasanwayhid adversaries. Thanks to a ruse peace, Abū al-Shawk was able to eliminate his Ḥasanwayhid rival and capture the entirety of the Ḥasanwayhids’ territory. Like the Ḥasanwayhids, though, the ʿAnnazids were challenged by internal conflict: as their reach expanded, clan members increasingly involved themselves in independent interests, and they ultimately began to fracture. Without a system of centralized government control, the ʿAnnazids were especially vulnerable to the influx of Oghuz Turkmen into the region beginning in the mid-11th century and were eventually eclipsed in the early 12th century (although later sources mention one Surkhāb ibn ʿAnnāz, who ruled Lorestān in the second half of the 12th century).
