Antigonid dynasty,  ruling house of ancient Macedonia from 306 to 168 bce. The Antigonid dynasty was established when Demetrius I Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus I Monophthalmus, ousted Cassander’s governor of Athens, Demetrius of Phaleron, and conquered the island of Cyprus, thereby giving his father control of the Aegean, the eastern Mediterranean, and all of the Middle East except Babylonia. Antigonus I was proclaimed king in 306 by the assembled army of these areas.
Demetrius succeeded Antigonus I to the throne, and his son, Antigonus II Gonatas, strengthened the Macedonian kingdom by routing a band of Galatian invaders from Macedonia. In 239 Gonatas died, his resilience and solid work having given Macedonia a sound and durable government. Gonatas’s son Demetrius II (reigned 239–229 bce) at once became involved in a war with the Greek Achaean and Aetolian leagues that lasted until his death. Macedonia was weakened, and Demetrius’s heir, Philip V, was a child. Conditions became so unsettled that the child’s guardian, Antigonus Doson, took the throne as Antigonus III. He marched into Greece and, after defeating the Spartan king Cleomenes III at Sellasia (222), reestablished the Hellenic Alliance as a confederacy of leagues, with himself as president. Doson died in 221, having restored internal stability and reestablished Macedonia in a stronger position in Greece than it had enjoyed since the reign of Gonatas.
Under Philip V, Macedonia first clashed with Rome (215), but Philip seriously miscalculated Rome’s strength, and his defeat at Cynoscephalae (197) led to a peace that confined him to Macedonia. The Hellenic Alliance, which had fallen apart, was replaced by a series of leagues in former Macedonian areas. Above all, the old balance of power was upset and Rome became the decisive power in the eastern Mediterranean.
Philip’s successor, Perseus (reigned 179–168 bce), was recognized as a champion of Greek freedom against Rome. But Perseus’s failure to deploy his full resources brought about his defeat (168) at Pydna in Macedonia and signaled the end of the dynasty.
