Artuqid Dynasty,   Turkmen dynasty that ruled the province of Diyarbakır in northern Iraq (now in southeastern Turkey) through two branches: at Ḥiṣn Kayfā and Āmid (1098–1232) and at Mardin and Mayyāfāriqīn (1104–1408).
Artuq ibn Ekseb, founder of the dynasty, was rewarded for his services to the Seljuq sultan with the grant of Palestine in 1086. Forced out of Palestine by the Fāṭimids of Egypt, Artuq’s descendant Muʿīn ad-Dīn Sökmen returned to Diyarbakır, where he took Ḥiṣn Kayfā (1102), Mardin, and several other northern districts. His brother Najm ad-Dīn Ilghāzī, meanwhile, returned to Seljuq service and was made governor of Iraq by the Seljuq sultan Muḥammad. Sent to Diyarbakır in about 1107, Ilghāzī displaced one of Sökmen’s sons at Mardin (1108); he then made it the capital of his line, leaving Ḥiṣn Kayfā to his brother’s descendants.
The Artuqids’ relations with the Seljuqs thenceforth steadily worsened. Ilghāzī organized a Turkmen coalition against the Seljuq governor of Mosul and was able to win control of all Diyarbakır by 1118. The next year he defeated European crusaders who were threatening Aleppo. From 1113 the Artuqids also expanded into the northeast, along the eastern Euphrates.
The rise of the Zangids in Mosul and later in Aleppo during the reigns of Dāʾūd (c. 1109–44) and his successor, Kara Arslan (1144–67), ended Artuqid expansion. The Artuqids were instead drawn into wars against the crusaders and the Byzantines by the Zangid Nureddin and, at his death in 1174, found themselves Zangid vassals. Their position in Diyarbakır weakened further as Saladin, ruler of Egypt, gradually began to reconquer Nureddin’s old kingdom, and by 1186 the Artuqids had submitted to Saladin.
The Artuqids survived in Diyarbakır for two more centuries as vassals of the Seljuqs of Rūm and the Khwārezm-Shāhs. In 1232 the Artuqid line in Ḥiṣn Kayfā was destroyed by the Seljuqs; but the Mardin branch continued under the Mongols until 1408, when it was finally displaced by the Turkmen federation of the Kara Koyunlu.
The artistic traditions of the Artuqid age had a strong Seljuq flavour. Contact with the West occasionally brought some Byzantine elements into the iconography. Several examples of Artuqid metalwork have survived, and Artuqid textiles include delicate silks and heavier brocades. Little Artuqid architecture has survived. From recent excavations and historical descriptions, however, it is known that the palace at Diyarbakır was splendid.
