Baglioni Family,   related Umbrian nobles, many of whom were fierce and skillful condottiere, who dominated Perugia between 1488 and 1534. They were constantly challenged by other nobles and by the papacy.
The ascendancy of the family began with Malatesta (1389–1437), who joined with Bracchio Fortebracchi, tyrant of Perugia, in opposing Pope Martin V. Wounded and imprisoned in 1424, Malatesta won his release by promising to persuade Perugia’s populace to submit to Martin. He was rewarded with the seigneury of Spello (1425) and several other territories (e.g., the communities of Bettona and Bevagna). Although he was never formally created lord, Malatesta became the virtual ruler of Perugia. His son Bracchio (1419–74?) succeeded him.
After their success in expelling the rival Oddi family in 1488, the Baglioni created the Ten Judges (Dieci dell’Arbitrio), a council of 10 family members, as a device through which they hoped to govern Perugia. The period was marked by excessive violence, especially within the Baglioni family. One episode was the so-called great betrayal of 1500, during which Carlo and Grifonetto Baglioni attempted a mass assassination of the other members of the family. Giampaolo (or Giovan Paolo; c. 1470–1520), one of the few to escape execution, exacted a harsh retribution and emerged as the sole leader of Perugia.
Preferring the life of a condottiere, Giampaolo left administrative matters to the just and able Morgante, who died in 1502; soon afterward the Baglioni were forced to flee the city. Giampaolo and his cousin Gentile retook Perugia after a brief but fierce battle in 1503. Julius II, elected pope later that year, determined to control Perugia, and in 1506 the Baglioni acknowledged his overlordship.
Giampaolo continued to play an important role in the power struggles of the time until he was lured to Rome and killed by order of Pope Leo X. Gentile, who was implicated in Giampaolo’s death, remained in power as a tool of the church until he was expelled by Malatesta (1491–1531) and Orazio. Malatesta, a condottiere employed by both the Venetian and Florentine republics, is known for his betrayal of Florence, which he first defended against Pope Clement VII in 1529, only to hand it over to Clement the following year. Malatesta ruled Perugia until his death. His successor, Rodolfo (1518–54), was defeated by Pope Paul III, who banished the Baglioni in 1534. The Baglioni continued to furnish captains of war until, in the 17th century, the several branches of the family declined or disappeared.
