Colonna Family,   noble Roman family of great antiquity and importance, descended from the 10th-century counts of Tusculum. The first to take the name Colonna (“de Columna”) was Piero, the son of Gregorio, Count of Tusculum, who on Gregorio’s death (c. 1064) received the castle of Colonna in the Alban Hills, together with Palestrina and other places, as his share of the inheritance. Like other Roman families, the Colonna gained power and wealth through papal favour and by the 13th century were already providing cardinals and senators of Rome. Thereafter, the Colonna were consistently prominent in the politics of the church and the city of Rome.
Throughout the Middle Ages, they figured among the most unruly and potent of the Roman baronial dynasties; their feuds with the Caetani and Orsini dominated the local history of a region where feudal power long remained unsubdued. Of more than local importance, however, was their bitter quarrel with the Caetani pope, Boniface VIII, who tried to extirpate the family and drove them into alliance with his enemy, the French king Philip IV the Fair; Sciarra Colonna (d. 1329) led the armed attack on Boniface at Anagni on Sept. 7, 1303. On the pope’s death the Colonna recovered their lands and influence, and for many years subsequently Rome was harassed by their struggle for power with the Orsini, which divided the nobility into two contending factions. These conditions gave rise to Cola di Rienzo’s popular dictatorship, which was a check to all the Roman magnates and notably the Colonna, over whom the tribune won a bloody victory at Porta San Lorenzo in Rome on Nov. 20, 1347. The check, however, was temporary; Colonna power was undiminished and soon after was signally increased by the election at Constance of Cardinal Oddone Colonna as Pope Martin V. During his pontificate (1417–31), Martin obtained the grant of fiefs for his family in southern Italy and enriched them with vast estates in papal territory, including Frascati, Paliano, Genazzano, and many other places.
Their power was challenged by Martin’s successor, Eugenius IV, and for well over a century the fortunes of the Colonna continued to be disturbed by conflict with the popes; but from the later years of the 16th century they lived in unbroken peace with the papacy, and many members of the family rose to eminence as prelates, soldiers, and statesmen in the service of the church as well as other powers, particularly Spain.
The surviving branches of the family comprise the Colonna di Paliano, the Colonna di Stigliano, and the Barberini-Colonna di Palestrina.
