Despenser family,  unpopular favourites of England’s King Edward II, who were executed by Edward’s opponents, Queen Isabella and Roger Mortimer.
Hugh Le Despenser (in full Hugh Le Despenser, earl of Winchester; b. 1262—d. Oct. 27, 1326, Bristol, Gloucestershire, Eng.), also known as Hugh the Elder, was summoned to Parliament as a baron in 1295. He fought in France and Scotland for Edward I and was sent by him on several embassies, including two to the pope. He was one of the few supporters, in 1308, of Piers Gaveston, Edward II’s favourite; after Gaveston’s death in 1312 he became the king’s chief adviser until Thomas, earl of Lancaster, leader of the baronial opposition, procured his dismissal from court and council in February 1315. He then worked to further the interests of his son, Hugh Le Despenser (Hugh the Younger; d. Nov. 24, 1326, Hereford, Herefordshire, Eng.), who had been in the king’s household when he was prince of Wales. The younger Hugh was appointed the king’s chamberlain in 1318, but both father and son were attacked in Parliament by the magnates in 1321; the intense hatred with which the barons regarded the Despensers was due to the enormous wealth that had passed into their hands and to the arrogance and rapacity of the younger Hugh. At last the king was forced to agree to their disinheritance and exile. The elder Hugh went abroad but the younger remained in the Cinque Ports and engaged in piracy.
After the collapse of the opposition at the Battle of Boroughbridge (March 1322), the Despensers returned to power, and the elder Hugh was created earl of Winchester. Hugh the Younger worked to enhance the importance of the chamberlain’s office: he diverted to it from the Exchequer the revenue from certain lands, developed it as a department equipped with its own seal and provided private income for the king. But his administration aroused discontent. He had married (1306) Eleanor, coheiress of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester (d. 1314). Hugh’s attempt to acquire the sole inheritance had been foiled by a division of Clare’s estates in 1317; but even so he received lands in Glamorgan and Wales. At the rebellion of Queen Isabella and Roger Mortimer (1326), both Despensers fled westward with the king. The elder, sent to defend Bristol, surrendered it to Isabella on October 26 and, after summary trial, was hanged the next day. The younger Despenser was captured with the king and tried and hanged a month later.
