Dionne quintuplets,  the five daughters—Émilie, Yvonne, Cécile, Marie, and Annette—born prematurely on May 28, 1934, near Callander, Ontario, Canada, to Oliva and Elzire Dionne. The parents had 14 children, 9 by single births. The quintuplets became international celebrities during their early years—making three feature films for Twentieth Century-Fox, providing profitable endorsements for products from cod-liver oil to typewriters and automobiles, and attracting hordes of tourists to northern Ontario. The attending physician, Allan Roy Dafoe (d. 1941), also became a celebrity. In 1935 Ontario made the quintuplets wards of the government, and Dafoe became their primary caretaker. A hospital was built for them to live in, and “Quintland,” as it was known, became a popular tourist destination. Their father regained custody in 1941; in 1998 the sisters successfully sued the government for separating them from their parents.
The “quints” were remarkable in being the first medically and genetically documented set that survived; not one member of any other quintuplet set had previously lived more than a few days. The Dionne set had a sixth member that aborted during the third month of pregnancy. Much credit for the survival of the five premature infants was due to the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, which quickly made available to Dafoe quantities of mother’s milk and modern incubators and other equipment. The University of Toronto conducted biological, psychological, and dental studies of the quintuplets. The biological study established that the set originated from one fertilized egg. The Dionne quintuplets arose through repeated twinning of the early single embryo; therefore, six embryos were produced, and the five infants surviving birth inherited the same genetic material.
Three of the sisters married: Annette had three sons; Marie had two daughters; and Cécile had four sons and one daughter. Only Cécile had a multiple birth: twin sons, one of whom died at the age of 15 months.
Émilie died of an epileptic seizure on August 6, 1954, at Sainte-Agathe-des-Monts, Quebec; Marie died in Montreal on February 27, 1970; Yvonne died on June 23, 2001, in Montreal. In their memoirs We Were Five (1964) and Family Secrets: The Dionne Quintuplets’ Autobiography (1994), the sisters describe the exploitation they endured as children.
