Doria Family, also spelled D’oria,  leading family in the political, military, and economic life of Genoa, from the 12th century onward.
Apparently of feudal origin, from Liguria and Provence, the Dorias first appeared in Genoese records early in the 12th century. Ansaldo Doria was elected consul of the commune of Genoa in 1134 and took part in several embassies and military expeditions. His son Simone served six consulships between 1175 and 1188, and one of Simone’s sons, Andrea, married into Sardinia’s ruling family, the Torres, launching Doria fortunes in that island. By this time the Dorias had long been leaders of the Ghibelline (imperial) political faction.
In 1270 Andrea’s grandson Oberto Doria (died 1295) and Oberto Spinola, member of another great Genoese family, inaugurated a series of two-man governments headed by their families, with dictatorial powers as captains of the people. Ruling for 15 years during what has been termed the golden age of the Genoese medieval commune, Oberto Doria was a hero of the decisive Battle of Meloria (1284) against Pisa, in which 250 members of the Doria family are said to have participated.
Members of the Doria family played an important role in the Genoese Crimean colony of Caffa and in the empire of Trebizond, south of the Black Sea. Domenico Doria, traveler and cartographer, was appointed in 1285 by the Mongols as their ambassador to Europe.
In the 14th century several other members of the Doria and Spinola families served as cocaptains of the people. After a popular revolution that led to the institution of a doge, the Dorias were excluded from government office (1339–1528) but provided many military leaders for Genoa in its perennial struggle with Venice.
In the 16th century the emergence of the greatest member of the family, Andrea Doria, opened a new period in the history of Genoa and of the Dorias, bringing them once more to the political fore. Giovanni Andrea (1539–1606), Andrea’s grandnephew, was his lieutenant and heir, serving as Genoese admiral against the Turks in the War of Cyprus (1570–71). He took part victoriously in the Battle of Lepanto (1571), which ended the threat of Turkish supremacy in the eastern Mediterranean.
In the 16th and 17th centuries the Dorias continued to furnish military men, principally to Spain, while becoming the richest family in Genoa. In the period of the “aristocratic republic” (1528–1797) inaugurated by Andrea Doria, the family contributed six doges as well as many ambassadors and prelates.
