Fieschi Family,   a noble Genoese family whose members played an important role in Guelf (papal party) politics in medieval Italy. The Fieschi allied with the Angevin kings of Sicily and later with the kings of France; the family produced two popes, 72 cardinals, and many generals, admirals, and ambassadors.
Ugo, son of the Count of Lavagna, was the first to assume the name Fieschi. Ugo’s son Sinibaldo became pope in 1243 as Innocent IV, an event that at once established the family as leaders of the Guelf party against the Holy Roman emperor. Driven from power in Genoa during the democratic revolution of 1257, the Fieschi took part in a plot against the popular leader Guglielmo Boccanegra and were exiled, but they returned in 1262 with another Guelf family, the Grimaldi (q.v.), to execute a counterrevolution. Dominating the city, the Fieschi and Grimaldi allied themselves with the French prince Charles of Anjou, under whose protection they placed Genoa. Public reaction to this move drove them from power in 1270, when the Ghibelline leaders Oberto Doria and Oberto Spinola became captains of the people.
In the early years of the 14th century the family adopted a policy of encouraging conflict between the Dorias and Spinolas, a tactic that returned them to power in Genoa in 1317, when Carlo Fieschi and Gaspare Grimaldi became captains of the people. The coup was followed by a long struggle between the two rival factions in Genoa, with periodic intervention by the Guelfs and Ghibellines of other cities. The conflict was terminated by King Robert of Naples’ seizure of Genoa in 1331, which was followed by the democratic revolution of 1339 and the institution of the popular dogeship in Genoa. The Fieschi, like the other noble families, were excluded from government but served as ambassadors and military men. Toward the end of the century, however, by allying with the counts of Savoy and the kings of France, they recouped their fortunes. After Filippo Maria Visconti of Milan took Genoa in 1422, the Fieschi put up determined opposition to the Visconti until a revolt in 1436 ended the latter’s rule in the city.
Throughout the 15th century the Fieschi continued their factional involvement, first favouring, then opposing the Sforza of Milan.
After the great Genoese statesman Andrea Doria’s conquest of Genoa for the Holy Roman emperor Charles V (1528), Gian Luigi Fieschi (q.v.; 1522–47) plotted to assassinate Doria and return Genoa to French, and thus Fieschi, rule. The failure of the conspiracy marked the end of his line and of Fieschi power, though other branches of the family survived, producing government officials and diplomats for Genoa and a saint, Catherine of Genoa. 
