Fujiwara Family,  dynastic family that, by shrewd intermarriage and diplomacy, dominated the Japanese imperial government from the 9th to the 12th century. 
The power and authority of the Fujiwara family rested not on military prowess but on political strategy and on the family’s special relationship to the imperial family, which it carefully cultivated and exploited. This relationship stemmed from the Fujiwara policy of maintaining attachment to the imperial family through the marriage of Fujiwara daughters to emperors. It meant that the Fujiwara daughters were empresses, that their grandsons and nephews were emperors, and that members of their family, including its lesser branches, received all the patronage. Thus, the Fujiwara clan chieftain, whether he held office or not, could manipulate the reins of government.
The Fujiwara also took care to combine with the Buddhist hierarchy in order to increase its influence. A precedent set by pious emperors, who shaved their heads and retired to monasteries, was employed by the Fujiwara to persuade independent-minded emperors to retire from worldly affairs. Nor did the family neglect laying a firm economic foundation for its political power. It encouraged the landed gentry in the provinces to commend land to the Fujiwara, which resulted in greatly reduced taxes for the landowners—sometimes eliminating their tax obligations altogether—and permitted the Fujiwara to divert public revenues to the family coffers.
Although the Fujiwara rise to power was gradual, its founding in the 7th century foretold its future role and importance. Its founder, Nakatomi Kamatari (see Fujiwara Kamatari), was already in his day the de facto ruler of the country, for it was he, together with the heir apparent, who had earlier plotted and successfully carried out the overthrow of a powerful rival of the imperial house. It was to Kamatari, therefore, that a grateful prince, who consequently was able to ascend the throne as the emperor Tenji, entrusted the affairs of government. In the year of Kamatari’s death, the emperor conferred on him the new family name of Fujiwara (“Wisteria Arbour”), in commemoration of the place where the two had conspired to oust their common rival.
Fuhito (see Fujiwara Fuhito), Kamatari’s son, was the first to use the new name. And it was he who, by arranging the marriage of a daughter to Emperor Shōmu, began the policy of attaching his own family to the imperial family. Fuhito’s four sons each established a branch of the family, of which the Hokke, or Northern Branch, was to become the most influential.
But it was not until the latter half of the 9th century that Fujiwara power began to be felt. Yoshifusa (see Fujiwara Yoshifusa), who was father-in-law to the reigning monarch and grandfather of the heir apparent, at the Emperor’s death succeeded in having the heir elevated to the throne as the emperor Seiwa at the age of nine. Yoshifusa, thereupon, had himself appointed regent—the first instance in Japanese history of a person not of royal blood being named to this position. This led to the practice of the Fujiwara persuading emperors to retire at a comparatively early age and of placing on the throne child emperors, for whom the Fujiwara acted as regents. During the next two centuries there were eight such abdications and seven child emperors.
With a firm grip on the regency, the Fujiwara had seemingly gone as far as they could to become the de facto rulers without actually destroying or displacing the Imperial family. The only drawback to the regency was that it ended when the emperor reached his majority. This was remedied when Yoshifusa’s nephew Mototsune (see Fujiwara Mototsune) established a new position more prestigious and powerful than that of regent or prime minister—the office of kampaku (chancellor), whose function was to serve as the emperor’s spokesman and intermediary between the throne and the officialdom. In practice it was a chancellorship and the highest office in the land, second only to the emperor and sought by all subsequent leaders.
The Fujiwara monopoly of government in the 9th century was interrupted only briefly when the emperor Uda, who did not have a Fujiwara mother, ascended the throne in 887. Uda, moreover, managed to reign without a Fujiwara regent and, in the last six years of his reign, without a Fujiwara kampaku, because of the death of Mototsune.
Mototsune’s son, Tokihira (see Fujiwara Tokihira), only 21 years old at his father’s death, quickly re-established Fujiwara domination. Tokihira never advanced to the office of kampaku, yet he effectively removed or neutralized opposition to the family. Among his rivals was a celebrated and beloved scholar-statesman, Sugawara Michizane, who was falsely accused of conspiring to place his own grandson on the throne and was banished to distant Kyushu. Other rivals were given sinecures to monasteries and lectureships in Chinese history by the resourceful Tokihira and were thus effectively removed from politics. That he was able to accomplish these moves from a relatively low position demonstrated that the Fujiwara, whether in high office or not, were the real rulers of the country.
