Gahadavala dynasty,  one of the many ruling families of north India on the eve of the Muslim conquests in the 12th–13th century. Its history, ranging between the second half of the 11th century and the mid-13th century, illustrates all the features of early medieval north Indian polity—dynastic hostilities and alliances, feudal state structure, absolute dependence on Brahmanical social ideology, and vulnerability in the face of external aggressions.
The family, perhaps originating in the area of Benares (Varanasi) and Oudh (Ayodhya) in Uttar Pradesh, later came to be associated with Kannauj, which had become one of the most crucial political centres in India. The majority of the Gahadavala epigraphic records were discovered in Uttar Pradesh and issued from Varanasi. The dynastic power became gradually consolidated in the period of the first three rulers: Yashovigraha, Mahichandra, and Chandradeva (c. 1089–1103). By the period of Chandradeva, the Gahadavalas had taken control of Varanasi, Ayodhya, Kannauj, and Indrasthaniyaka (modern Delhi) and had expanded throughout Uttar Pradesh—sometimes at the expense of such powers as the Kalacuri dynasty. The Gahadavalas sought to ward off the growing menace of Muslim incursions by expedient alliances and the payment of tributes, at least until the period of Chandradeva’s son Madanapala (reigned c. 1104–13), who was, in all probability, the Kannauj king imprisoned and later released during the period of Ghaznavid Sultan Masʿūd III. Despite the regularity of Muslim attacks, which were at least temporarily repulsed by Govindachandra (reigned c. 1113–15), the Gahadavalas endeavoured to spread eastward; Govindachandra expanded to the Patna and Munger areas in Bihar, and in 1168–69 southwestern Bihar was being ruled by a feudatory of his son Vijayachandra (reigned c. 1155–69). Conventional accounts seem to suggest that Govindachandra had varied relations with an impressive number of Indian and non-Indian countries. Despite obvious exaggeration, hostilities with such powers as the Palas, Senas, and Kalacuris appear to be substantially factual.
The weakness of the internal structure of the Gahadavala kingdom was finally exposed late in the 12th century during the invasions of Muʿizz al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Sām of Ghūr. Jayachandra (reigned c. 1170–94), who held Uttar Pradesh and parts of Bihar, had, according to bardic accounts, bitter enmity with the Chauhans (Chahamanas) of Rajasthan. He lost the battle and his life at Chandawar (Etawah, Uttar Pradesh) in an encounter with Muḥammad of Ghūr. Although the Gahadavalas lingered in Harishchandra’s reign (c. 1194–?) in the Kannauj, Jaunpur, and Mirzapur regions until 1197, the buildup of Muslim expansion in the areas was steady through the early 13th century. Gahadavala royalty had an obscure death, sometime before the middle of the 13th century, at Nagod in central India, to which Adakkamalla, the last known Gahadavala, had escaped.
