Gonzaga Dynasty,   Italian dynasty whose heads ruled Mantua from 1328 to 1707 and also Montferrat, with the stronghold of Casale, from 1536 to 1707. Their origins are uncertain, but by the 12th century the Corradi family of Gonzaga were established as members of the feudal gentry owning estates near Mantua, to which during the 13th century they managed to add other extensive properties. They took their name from the village and castle of Gonzaga, situated midway between Mantua and Reggio.
The dynasty’s known history begins with the 14th century, when Luigi I (also called Ludovico; 1267–1360), after fierce struggles, supplanted his brother-in-law Rinaldo (nicknamed Passerino) Bonacolsi as lord of Mantua in August 1328, with the title of captain general and afterward of vicar-general of the empire, adding the designation of count of Mirandola and Concordia. In July 1335 his son Guido wrested Reggio from the Scaligeri, and the Gonzaga held it until 1371. Luigi was succeeded by Guido (d. 1369); the latter’s son Luigi II (or Ludovico II; d. 1382) came next in succession, and then Giovan Francesco I (sometimes referred to as Francesco I; d. 1407), who, although at one time allied with the treacherous Gian Galeazzo Visconti, incurred the latter’s enmity and all but lost his estates and his life in consequence; eventually he joined the Florentines and Bolognese, enemies of Visconti. He promoted commerce and wisely developed the prosperity of his dominions.
His son Giovan Francesco II (Gianfrancesco; d. 1444), who succeeded him, became a famous general and was rewarded for his services to the Holy Roman emperor Sigismund with the title of marquess of Mantua for himself and his descendants (1432), an investiture that legitimatized the usurpations of the house of Gonzaga. Under Giovan Francesco II the first school inspired by humanistic principles was founded in 1423 in one of the family’s villas near Mantua by Vittorino de Feltre. Artists also found their way to Mantua, notably Andrea Mantegna and Leon Battista Alberti, and during the 15th century the capital city and its dependencies were embellished and transformed. Giovan Francesco’s son Luigi (or Ludovico) III “il Turco” (d. 1478) likewise became a celebrated soldier and a learned and liberal prince, a patron of literature and the arts.
His son Federigo I and grandson Giovan Francesco III (Francesco II; d. 1519) continued the military traditions of the family and raised the Mantuan lordship to the height of its prestige and power. In the dangerous and difficult politics that engaged northern Italy after the French invasion of 1494, the Gonzaga sided with the Holy Roman emperor Charles V. They commanded the allied Italian forces against Charles VIII of France at the Battle of Fornovo, and Giovan Francesco III afterward fought in the kingdom of Naples and in Tuscany, until captured by the Venetians in 1509. On his liberation he adopted a more peaceful and conciliatory policy, and with the help of his wife, the famous Isabella d’Este, he promoted the fine arts and letters. He was succeeded by his son Federigo II (d. 1540), captain general of the papal forces. After the Peace of Cambrai (1529) Federigo II’s ally and protector, the emperor Charles V, raised his title to that of duke of Mantua in 1530. It was during Federigo II’s reign that the court of Mantua achieved its greatest brilliance. Palaces and villas were lavishly commissioned and splendidly adorned, among them the famous Palazzo del Te designed by Giulio Romano, and many artists as well as writers of distinction found employment or encouragement in Mantua: Baldessare Castiglione and Matteo Bandello, Matteo Boiardo and Ludovico Ariosto, Francesco Berni and Pietro Bembo, Raphael, Leonardo, Titian, and Claudio Monteverdi.
Federigo II’s son Francesco I (Francesco III) succeeded his father but died young, leaving his possessions to his brother Guglielmo. The latter was an extravagant spendthrift, as was his son Vincenzo I (d. 1612). Then followed in succession Vincenzo’s sons Francesco II (Francesco; d. 1612), Ferdinando (d. 1626), and Vincenzo II (d. 1627), all three incapable princes. Mantua thereafter was laid waste by foreign invasions and ruled by dissolute dukes until 1708, when Austria annexed the duchy. On July 5 of the same year the last duke, Ferdinand Charles, died in Venice, and with him the Gonzagas of Mantua came to an end.
