Grimaldi Family,   one of the major families of Genoa, prominent in Guelf (pro-papal) politics and supporters of the Angevin kings of Naples. The Grimaldis became lords of Monaco in the 15th century.
Descended from a 12th-century Grimaldo who was several times consul of the Genoese commune, the Grimaldi and another important family, the Fieschi, headed the Guelf party during the struggles between the papacy and the empire and allied themselves with the French prince Charles of Anjou, then king of Naples. In 1297 the Grimaldi seized power in Monaco, turning it into a base of operations against the Genoese Ghibellines. But over the next century they alternately lost and won control of the city, during a period of turbulent politics and wars throughout Italy.
The Grimaldi contributed many admirals and ambassadors to Genoa during the popular dogeship (1339–1528) but continued their intermittent connection with Monaco; in 1395 Giovanni and Luigi Grimaldi profited by civil strife in Genoa to seize Monaco, losing it, however, shortly after to the French. In 1419 a branch of the family succeeded in taking what proved to be final possession of Monaco, though they did not assume the title of prince until 1659.
During the French Revolution the Grimaldi were dispossessed, and Monaco was annexed to France. With the Treaty of Paris of 1814, they regained the principality. Notable among the Grimaldi princes was Albert I (1848–1922), who gave Monaco a constitution in 1911. An enthusiastic oceanographer, he founded the Oceanographic Museum in Monaco and the Oceanographic Institute in Paris. His great-grandson Rainier III became prince in 1949, marrying Grace Kelly, American motion-picture actress, in 1956.
Other lines of the family remained in Genoa and continued to constitute one of that city’s wealthiest and most numerous families. During the period of the “aristocratic republic” (1528–1797), six Grimaldi were Genoese doges, while other members of the family served as senators, magistrates, diplomats, and prelates. 
