Han dynasty, Wade-Giles romanization Han,  the second great imperial dynasty of China (206 bce–220 ce), after the Zhou dynasty (1046–256 bce). It succeeded the Qin dynasty (221–207 bce). So thoroughly did the Han dynasty establish what was thereafter considered Chinese culture that “Han” became the Chinese word denoting someone who is ethnically Chinese.
The dynasty was founded by Liu Bang, later the Gaozu emperor (reigned 206–195 bce), a man of humble birth who led the revolt against the repressive policies of the preceding short-lived Qin dynasty. The Han copied the highly centralized Qin administrative structure, dividing the country into a series of administrative areas ruled by centrally appointed officials and developing a salaried bureaucracy in which promotion was based primarily on merit. Unlike the Qin, however, the Han adopted a Confucian ideology that emphasized moderation, virtue, and filial piety and thereby masked the authoritarian policies of the regime.
So successful was that policy that the Han lasted longer than any other Chinese empire, reigning—with a short interruption when Wang Mang temporarily usurped the throne and established the Xin dynasty (9–25 ce)—for more than 400 years. Eleven members of the Liu family followed in the Gaozu emperor’s place until 6 ce (a 12th briefly occupied the throne as a puppet). In 25 ce the authority of the Han dynasty was reaffirmed by Liu Xiu (posthumous name Guangwudi), who reigned as Han emperor until 57. Thirteen of his descendants maintained the dynastic succession until 220, when the rule of a single empire was replaced by that of three separate kingdoms. (See Three Kingdoms [Sanguo].)
Some scholars divide the Han into two sections. The period before Wang Mang’s usurpation—when the capital was in the western Chinese city of Chang’an (now Xi’an, Shaanxi province)—is called the Qian (Former), or Xi (Western) Han (206 bce–25 ce), and the period after Wang Mang—when the capital was moved eastward to Luoyang (in present-day Henan province—is named the Hou (Later), or Dong (Eastern), Han (25–220 ce). The four centuries in question, however, may be treated as a single historical period by virtue of dynastic continuity, for, apart from the short interval of 9–25, imperial authority was unquestionably vested in successive members of the same family, although the period was one of considerable changes in imperial, political, and social development. Organs of government were established, tried, modified, or replaced, and new social distinctions were brought into being. Chinese prestige among other peoples varied with the political stability and military strength of the Han house, and the extent of territory that was subject to the jurisdiction of Han officials varied with the success of Han arms. At the same time, the example of the palace, the activities of government, and the growing luxuries of city life gave rise to new standards of cultural and technological achievement.
Instances of book burning and repression during the preceding 14-year Qin period that spared only a writing system for keeping records were intended to stamp out all forms of dissent, and they took a great toll on cultural expression. However, the brutish Qin regime was too brief to thoroughly accomplish such a broad goal, and the vestiges of culture were revived by the successor Han.
The Han was not only a literate society but one of compulsive record keepers. Thus, the cultural milieu of the dynasty was well documented. The Yuefu, or Music Bureau, for example, compiled detailed descriptions of the music of the day and its instruments, techniques, and songs. In the court and the Confucian temples, music fell into two categories: music to accompany banquets and ritual music. In temple rituals, dance was often an important element, and something resembling a system of dance notation recorded the movements of large bands of musicians and companies of dancers in their performances. There also were highly informal dances with much body movement but little footwork that were part of private entertainment. Several forms of plucked string instruments were in use during the Han. Buddhism came to China from India during the dynasty, and with it came richly sonorous bronze bells. A form of drama appeared in which performers acted out the heroic deeds of celebrated warriors.
Although little except walls and tombs remains of Han architecture, much has been learned about the style from mingqi house models and paintings on tomb tiles. Imperial records describe the main palace of the Dong Han at Luoyang as being immensely proportioned, surrounded by tall towers variously of timber, stone, and brick. The tombs had vaulted roofs and were enclosed in huge earthen mounds that still stand centuries after their contents were looted. Interior walls of important buildings were plastered and painted—so the ubiquitous records relate—with figures, portraits, and scenes from history. Although the names of the artists did not survive, the highest-ranking of them—the daizhao, or painters-in-attendance—were close associates of the emperor. That tradition was carried on in ensuing dynasties until modern times. In addition to wall paintings, paintings on standing room-divider screens and on rolls or scrolls of silk appeared in the Han.
The first major stone tomb sculpture in China was created in the Han period, and lifelike clay figurines of people and animals also appeared. In the Xi Han, bronzework continued the style of the late Zhou period and often was inlaid with silver and gold. Bronze vessels were made both for sacrificial rituals and for household use, the latter including lamps, mirrors, and garment hooks fashioned in the form of humans, animals, and mythical beasts. The weaving of silk in rich colours and patterns of geometric designs or cloud and mountain themes became a major industry and source of export trade. Han potters included house models and human figures among their funerary wares, and two types of glazed ware were used domestically, often closely imitating the shape and design of bronze vessels.
Artisans in the Shang dynasty (c. 1600–1046 bce) had discovered lacquer, but it was during the Han that lacquerwork was brought to extreme perfection. The high quality of Han lacquerware can be seen in lacquered wine cups, still in perfect condition, that have been excavated from water-sodden graves in northern China. Many exquisite examples of Han lacquerware survive.
Poetry was nurtured during the Han period, and a new genre, fu, a combination of rhyme and prose, began to flourish. Fu were long descriptive compositions that were meant to entertain, and they became the norm of creative writing. About 1,000 examples survive. The prose literature of the era included works of history, philosophy, and politics. One of the greatest of early histories comes from that period in the Shiji (“Historical Records”) of Sima Qian. In sharp distinction from the Qin, who tried to suppress culture, the Han came to require cultural accomplishment from their public servants, making mastery of classical texts a condition of employment. The title list of the enormous imperial library is China’s first bibliography. Its text included works on practical matters such as mathematics and medicine, as well as treatises on philosophy and religion and the arts. Advancement in science and technology was also sought by the rulers, and the Han invented paper, used water clocks and sundials, and developed a seismograph. Calendars were published frequently during the period. The governmental, cultural, and technological achievements of the Han were such that every ensuing dynasty sought to emulate them.
