Ḥasanwayhid dynasty, Ḥasanwayhid also spelled Ḥasanūyid,  Kurdish dynasty (c. 961–1015) that ruled a principality around Kermānshāh in the central Zagros Mountains region of what is now Iran. The Ḥasanwayhids, with their power base in the Kurdish Barzikānī tribe, were later superseded by a rival Kurdish dynasty, the ʿAnnazid dynasty.
The dynasty’s founder was Ḥasanwayh (Ḥasanūyah) ibn Ḥusayn, a Barzikānī leader who was able to acquire a number of holdings in the region. He fortified his position through affiliation with the local Būyid leaders, whom he assisted in campaigns against their adversaries, and, being in their favour, he was able to dominate other Kurdish groups. He later took advantage of his position by expanding his scope to claim protection money from those who lived around Hamadān. When the local governor sought to curb him, Ḥasanwayh met him with force. Troops were sent to subdue Ḥasanwayh, but ultimately the Kurdish leader was able to conclude a favourable peace that gave him virtual independence (including the right to collect taxes) in exchange for an annual tribute. He maintained this position, virtually unchallenged, until his death at the Ḥasanwayhid stronghold of Sarmāj (south of Bīsitūn) in 979.
After his death, Ḥasanwayh’s sons fell into conflict over his inheritance, and the Būyid leader ʿAḍūḍ al-Dawlah took advantage of the strife as an opportunity to bring the region under his control. He seized Sarmāj and backed one of Ḥasanwayh’s sons, Badr ibn Ḥasanwayh as leader. With the support of ʿAḍūḍ al-Dawlah, Badr emerged victorious, and most of his brothers were killed. When his Būyid patron died in 983, Badr retained his position and ruled more or less without challenge until his death in 1014.
Sources recall Badr as an ideal ruler. He constructed a market in Hamadān to promote the prosperity of its denizens and earned a substantial profit as a result. He was also able to fund the protection of the hajj route, an endeavour that considerably enhanced his prestige. Although he exercised influence over urban centres such as Hamadān and Rayy, he did so from afar: his success depended in part upon the support of his Kurdish tribesmen, and he declined to distance himself from them by living in a city.
The end of Badr’s life was met with the rise of the rival ʿAnnazids, who killed Badr’s grandson Ṭāhir (or Ẓāhir) ibn Hilāl in 1015 and replaced the Ḥasanwayhids in their domain. The Ḥasanwayhids retained only the Sarmāj stronghold, where the last Ḥasanwayhid heir died in 1047.
