House of Přemysl, also called Přemyslid dynasty,  first Czech ruling house, founded, according to tradition, by the plowman Přemysl, who was married to the princess Libuše. The members of the Přemyslid dynasty ruled Bohemia and the lands associated with it from about 800 to 1306. The head of the Přemyslid house was usually designated a prince, or duke (kníže), until 1198, when Přemysl Otakar I raised Bohemia to the status of a hereditary kingdom within the Holy Roman Empire.
Historical records of the early Přemyslid rulers are scanty. According to legend, Prince Borivoj is said to have been converted to Christianity by Saint Methodius (fl. mid-9th century). Bohemia was consolidated politically in the 10th century, and the best known of its rulers at this time was Borivoj’s grandson Wenceslas I, whose zeal for spreading Christianity in his dominions contributed to his murder, committed according to legend by his pagan brother Boleslav I (reigned from 929/935 to 967). Wenceslas subsequently came to be venerated as the patron saint of Bohemia. During the rule of Boleslav II (967–999), the Christian church in Bohemia was organized and a bishopric was founded in Prague. Boleslav II’s death was followed by a period of fratricidal warfare between his sons that terminated in 1012 when the youngest son, Oldrich, established himself as prince of Bohemia. Oldrich died in 1037 and was succeeded by his son Bretislav I (1037–55). For the next century and a half, disputes and feuds among the members of the Přemyslid family hindered Bohemia’s political development, the chief source of discord being the absence of any strict law of succession to the Bohemian throne. At some periods the principle of seniority was observed, while at other times the deceased prince’s oldest son attained the throne.
During this period of disarray Bohemia became increasingly dependent on the Holy Roman Empire to the west. The Přemyslid prince Vratislav II (1061–92) obtained from the Holy Roman emperor Henry IV the title of king of Bohemia as a personal (i.e., nonhereditary) privilege, and Prince Vladislav II (1140–73) was awarded the royal crown on the same basis by Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa. In 1197 Přemysl Otakar I became the undisputed overlord of the Přemyslid domains, and in 1198 he was able to secure the royal title for his descendants as well as himself. Under Přemysl Otakar I, medieval Bohemia reached the height of its economic prosperity and political prominence. Přemysl was succeeded by King Wenceslas I (1230–53) and the latter’s son, Přemysl Otakar II (1253–78), who was one of the greatest rulers of Bohemia. Přemysl Otakar II died in battle in 1278 during one of his expansionist military campaigns and was succeeded by his son Wenceslas II. That ruler’s diplomatic dexterity and great wealth gained for him the crown of Poland in 1300, but he died prematurely in 1305. His only son, Wenceslas III, inherited Bohemia but was assassinated in 1306 while traveling to Poland. Thus ended the long rule of the Přemyslid dynasty in Bohemia. The Bohemian throne subsequently passed to John of Luxembourg, the founder of the Bohemian branch of the Luxembourg dynasty.
