House of Hauteville, Italian Altavilla,  line of Norman lords and knights who were founders of fiefdoms and kingdoms in southern Italy and Sicily in the 11th and 12th centuries. The wars fought by members of the Hauteville family contributed to a steady reduction of Muslim and Byzantine power in the region. In their conquered territories the Hauteville descendants established strong states that were organized according to hierarchical feudal norms. Freedom of religious worship was widely permitted.
Three Hauteville brothers—William, Drogo, and Humphrey—were among the Norman knights who flocked to southern Italy in the early 11th century. The sons of a minor Norman lord, Tancred, the three settled in southern Italy and Sicily, which were at that time a patchwork of warring towns and principalities, many under the influence of the Byzantine Empire. Serving at first as mercenaries, the brothers soon began to seize lands for themselves. They also recruited more knights for their wars and campaigns of plunder. In 1041 a Norman-Lombard force defeated a Byzantine army near Melfi. In a still greater challenge, Pope Leo IX led a combined force of local levies, Germans (Lombards), and others against the Normans at Civitate in 1053. The Normans again scored an impressive victory. A Hauteville, Robert Guiscard (c. 1015–85), a younger half brother of the earlier Hautevilles, distinguished himself and became a leader in the Norman conquests. Gradually but methodically, he drove the Byzantine forces from southern Italy. He made peace with Pope Nicholas II in 1059. Robert and his brother, Roger (1031–1101), then invaded Muslim-held Sicily. Roger became Roger I, ruler of Sicily. The Norman conquests continued until, with the fall of Bari in 1071, the last Byzantine forces had been driven from Italy. Palermo in Sicily, with its great port, fell in 1072. In 1085 the Normans attacked the Byzantine Empire itself but had to withdraw because of revolts in Italy. Still allies of the papacy, the Norman knights became crusaders in the closing years of the 11th century. Bohemond (1050/58–1109) and Tancred (c. 1075–1112), both Hautevilles, joined the First Crusade in 1096 and gained fame as military leaders. By 1154 Roger II (1095–1154), the youngest living son of Roger I, had extended his kingdom throughout all of southern Italy and Sicily and into Greece, had taken control of part of North Africa, and had made his court at Palermo an important centre of learning and culture. In 1130 he incorporated his territories into a kingdom. Under later rulers, the Hauteville dynasty gradually faded. In 1194 King Henry VI of Germany invaded Sicily. Taking complete control of the Norman kingdom, Henry put German officials into key administrative posts.
