Howard Family,  a famous English family whose head, the duke of Norfolk, is the premier duke and hereditary earl marshal of England. The earls of Suffolk, Carlisle, and Effingham and the Lord Howard of Glossop and Lord Stafford represent the family in its younger lines.
The family was founded by William Howard, a lawyer in the county of Norfolk who was summoned to Parliament in 1295. His family acquired the duchy of Norfolk through the marriage of Robert Howard with Margaret, daughter of Thomas Mowbray, 1st duke of Norfolk. Their son, John, eventually succeeded to most of the Mowbray estates and was created duke of Norfolk and hereditary earl marshal in 1483 when the Mowbray line died out. John was killed fighting for Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field (1485). His son, Thomas Howard, 2nd duke of Norfolk (1443–1524), was a councillor and military commander for the kings Henry VII and Henry VIII. His son, Thomas, the 3rd duke (1473–1554), held various high offices under Henry VIII, who took two of Norfolk’s nieces—Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard—as wives. After Catherine’s execution, both Norfolk and his son, Henry Howard, earl of Surrey (1517–47), were accused of treason by Henry; Surrey was executed, but Norfolk survived and regained his dukedom during the reign of Queen Mary. Surrey’s son, Thomas Howard, the 4th duke (1538–72), was executed for his intrigues against Queen Elizabeth I on behalf of Mary Queen of Scots. The family’s most notable member during Elizabeth’s reign was Charles, 2nd Lord Howard of Effingham (1536–1624), who was lord high admiral and commanded the fleet that defeated the Spanish Armada.
It took the Howards until 1660 to regain the title of duke of Norfolk, which had been forfeited with the 4th duke’s execution in 1572. In 1672 the office of earl marshal was made hereditary to the dukes of Norfolk. However, the civil disabilities incurred by the Howards on account of their Roman Catholicism tended to discourage the family’s prominence in subsequent periods.
