Hūdid Dynasty,   Muslim Arab dynasty that ruled Saragossa, Spain, in the 11th century during the politically confused period of the party kingdoms (ṭāʾifahs). The murder of the Tujībid king Mundhir II, in 1039, enabled one of his allies, Sulaymān ibn Muḥammad ibn Hūd, known as al-Mustaʿīn, to seize the Tujībid capital of Saragossa and establish a new dynasty. Al-Mustaʿīn, who had been a prominent military figure of the Upper, or Northern, Frontier and governor of Lérida, took control of a kingdom that covered a considerable portion of the northeastern Iberian Peninsula. After his death, in 1046, his five sons struggled for the throne; and Aḥmad I al-Muqtadir (reigned 1046–81) emerged as the new king.
Al-Muqtadir made a name for himself among the party kings with the recapture of Barbastro (1065), which had been seized from the Muslims a year earlier by the Norman Robert Crespin. He maintained a distinguished court with such notables as the theologian Abū al-Walīd al-Bājī and the poet Ibn ʿAmmār, and he built the Aljafería Palace, parts of which survive.
Although al-Muqtadir was at times tributary to Christian princes, he managed to expand his kingdom with the capture of Tortosa (1061) and Denia (1075–76), leaving it to his son Yūsuf al-Muʾtamin (reigned 1081–85), who was more a scholar than a political figure. The reign of Aḥmad II al-Mustaʿīn (1085–1110) was marked by constant wars against the Christians. He was dealt a severe defeat at Alcoraz in 1096, during the Christian march on Huesca; Saragossa itself was attacked, but the appearance of an army sent by the Almoravids (a North African Islāmic dynasty) forced the Christians into retreat.
After 1090–91, the Almoravids began to dissolve the various mulūk aṭ-ṭawāʾif (party kings), but, needing a buffer between themselves and the Christians, they allowed Saragossa to remain a kingdom. Al-Mustaʿīn, however, died in January 1110 fighting the Christians at Valtierra. The Almoravids seized the city in June of that year, forcing his successor, ʿImād ad-Dawlah, to flee for Rueda de Jalón, where he died in 1130.
ʿImād’s son Aḥmad III al-Mustanṣir was able to make arrangements with Alfonso VII of Castile and Leon to exchange Rueda for some territory in the province of Toledo. In the general revolt against the Almoravids in 1144, he assembled an army of Muslim supporters from the whole peninsula and proceeded to capture Córdoba, Jaén, Granada, Murcia, and Valencia. Their successes ended in a battle near Chinchilla in February 1146, in which the Muslim forces were defeated by the Christians. Al-Mustanṣir was killed, and the Hūdid line came to an end.
