Koryŏ dynasty,  in Korean history, dynasty that ruled the Korean peninsula as the Koryŏ kingdom from 935 to 1392 ce. During this period the country began to form its own cultural tradition distinct from the rest of East Asia. It is from the name Koryŏ that the Western name Korea is derived.
The dynasty that ruled Koryŏ was formed by Gen. Wang Kŏn, who in 918 overthrew the state of Later Koguryŏ, established in north-central Korea by the monk Kungye. Changing the name of the state to Koryŏ, Wang Kŏn established his capital at Songdo (present-day Kaesŏng, N.Kor.). With the surrender of the kingdoms of Silla (in 935) and Later Paekche (in 936) he established a unified kingdom on the peninsula.
A centralized bureaucratic system was established during the reign (981–997) of King Sŏngjong to replace the old aristocratic tribal system that had governed the country. Education and civil service examinations were used as a means of selecting the most capable officials and of absorbing the provincial magnates into the central government to consolidate its control over the countryside.
Confucianism exerted a strong influence on political life, but Buddhism was no less influential and widespread. The Tripitaka Koreana, one of the most complete editions of the Buddhist canon, was published in the first part of the Koryŏ period. The generally extravagant life of the aristocracy led to the flowering of art—particularly ceramics, such as the renowned Koryŏ celadon. Koryŏ visual art emphasizes decorative effect rather than mass. Its inclination toward elegance and technical perfection is sometimes attributed to the influence of Song China, but Koryŏ art’s contours are gentler.
Koryŏ generally enjoyed good relations with China and adopted its culture and political system. But Koryŏ often clashed with the peoples on the northern frontier. Despite the practical need for national defense, military officials were generally poorly treated, and this eventually led to a coup d’état, in 1170. Amid the subsequent disorder, one of the generals, Ch’oe Ch’ung-hŏn, was able to establish a military regime of his own that lasted from 1197 to 1258. The Ch’oe family, however, was content to rule behind the scenes, and it never actually usurped the throne. Hence, the dynasty continued to exist.
In the 13th century Koryŏ suffered from a series of invasions by the Mongols. King Kongmin (1352–74) attempted a set of reforms to drive out the invaders and eliminate their influence from the court, but without success. Finally, in 1392, the newly emerged Confucian scholar Gen. Yi Sŏng-gye overthrew the shaky dynasty and founded the Chosŏn (Yi) dynasty (1392–1910).
