Lusignan Family,   noble family of Poitou (a province of western France) that provided numerous crusaders and kings of Jerusalem, Cyprus, and Lesser Armenia. A branch of the family became counts of La Marche and Angoulême and played a role in precipitating the baronial revolt in England against King Henry III. The castle of Lusignan is associated with the medieval legend of Mélusine.
Hugh (Hugues) I, lord of Lusignan, was a vassal of the counts of Poitiers in the 10th century. Early members of the family participated in the Crusades, but it was Hugh VIII’s sons who established the family fortunes.
Hugh VIII’s eldest son and successor, Hugh IX the Brown (d. 1219), held the countship of La Marche. In 1200 his fiancée, Isabella of Angoulême, was taken for wife by his feudal lord, King John of England. This outrage caused Hugh to turn to the king of France, Philip II Augustus, forming an alliance that culminated in John’s loss of his continental possessions.
John, in an attempt to pacify Hugh, gave his daughter Joan as fiancée to Hugh X (d. 1249), but the marriage never took place. Instead, after John’s death, Hugh X married his widow, Isabella, in 1220. Hugh and Isabella fluctuated in their loyalty to John’s successor (Isabella’s son), Henry III. When Louis IX of France granted Poitou as a countship to his brother Alphonse, Hugh at first supported him. Isabella’s anger caused a turnabout and, eventually, brought about a disastrous revolt supported by Henry III. In this revolt Hugh lost his principal strongholds, but Louis IX pardoned the Lusignans, and they swore loyalty again.
Nine children were born to Isabella and Hugh X, five of whom went to England at the invitation of their half brother, Henry III. There they were rewarded with lands, riches, and distinctions at the expense of the English barons, who eventually revolted against Henry and forced the exile of the Lusignan brothers from England in 1258. Hugh XIII (d. 1303) pledged La Marche and Angoulême to Philip IV the Fair of France.
Two other sons of Hugh VIII became kings of Jerusalem and Cyprus. Guy (c. 1129–94), through his marriage to Sibyl, the sister of King Baldwin IV of Jerusalem, got the kingdom in 1186 but lost his capital city in wars with the Muslims (1187) and finally exchanged his empty title for the sovereignty of Cyprus (1192).
Guy’s brother Amalric (Amaury) II (d. April 1, 1205) succeeded to the crown of Cyprus and became king of Jerusalem in 1197 by marrying Sibyl’s sister Isabella after the death of her two previous husbands. Amalric was the founder of a dynasty of sovereigns of Cyprus lasting until 1475, when Cyprus was ceded to Venice. His descendants after 1269 regularly enjoyed the title of king of Jerusalem. Among the most famous members of the house who ruled in Cyprus was Peter I (Pierre I; d. 1369), who set forth on various expeditions against the Muslims in a last attempt to gain the Holy Lands. He was assassinated by discontented nobles in Cyprus.
