Menninger family,  American physicians who pioneered methods of psychiatric treatment in the 20th century.
Charles Frederick Menninger (born July 11, 1862, Tell City, Indiana, U.S.—died November 28, 1953, Topeka, Kansas) began practicing general medicine in Topeka in 1889 and became convinced of the benefit of group medical practice after visiting the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, in 1908. Menninger was joined in practice by his son Karl Augustus Menninger (born July 22, 1893, Topeka—died July 18, 1990, Topeka), who received a medical degree from Harvard Medical School in 1917 and spent two years working under Ernest Southard at the Boston Psychopathic Hospital. In 1919 the two Menningers established the Menninger Diagnostic Clinic in Topeka for the group practice of general medicine. Karl Menninger’s strong interest in psychiatry and the Topeka area’s lack of hospital care for the mentally ill led him to treat psychiatric patients as well. In 1924 Charles Menninger’s youngest son, William Claire Menninger (born October 15, 1899, Topeka—died September 6, 1966, Topeka), received an M.D. from Cornell University Medical College and served his internship at Bellevue Hospital in New York City. The following year he joined the family practice.
In 1925 the family established the Menninger Sanitarium and Psychopathic Hospital, a facility designed to apply group medical practice to psychiatric patients. In this and other facilities that followed, the Menningers linked two concepts: (1) the psychoanalytic understanding of behaviour as applied to the treatment of hospitalized patients and (2) the use of the social environment of the hospital as an adjunct to therapy. Thus, in the Menningers’ attempt to merge the psychiatric treatment of their patients with the local environment, all members of the clinic’s staff—nurses, therapists, orderlies, and even housekeepers—became an attentive and helpful part of the patients’ milieu. From the onset, psychiatric research was an important part of the Menningers’ total approach. The Menningers’ care and treatment of the mentally ill began to draw scientists interested in their ideas and eager to study at the hospital. In 1926 the Menningers opened the Southard School for mentally retarded children, and in a matter of years they were accepting children with all types of mental disorders.
The Menningers’ philosophy that psychiatry is a legitimate science and that the difference between a “normal” individual and a person with a mental illness is but a matter of degree was expounded in Karl Menninger’s first book, The Human Mind (1930), which became a best seller. In 1931 the Menninger Sanitarium became the first institution to gain approval as a training facility for nurses specializing in psychiatric care, and in 1933 it opened a neuropsychiatric residency program for physicians.
The formation of the Menninger Foundation in 1941 not only fulfilled the family’s goal of combining medical practice, research, and education on an international level but also marked the beginning of the first group psychiatric practice. The Menninger School of Psychiatry, established shortly afterward in 1946, quickly became the country’s largest training centre for psychiatric professionals, who were needed in increasing numbers to treat veterans returning home from World War II. About the same time, William Menninger led a national effort to reform state sanitariums; in 1948 he was featured on the cover of Time magazine, which hailed him as “psychiatry’s U.S. sales manager.”
Karl and William Menninger played guiding roles as the Menninger Foundation’s activities and institutions grew and diversified. William served as medical director of the Menninger Psychiatric Hospital and as president of the Menninger Foundation. Karl founded and directed the Menninger School of Psychiatry from 1946 to 1969 and served as chairman of the board of trustees of the Menninger Foundation. He also published books that explored psychiatry’s relation to society, and he wrote laypersons’ guides to psychoanalytic theory. In 1974 the foundation established the Center for Applied Behavioral Sciences, which provided current scientific information on human behaviour and motivation to business, industry, and government.
Descendents of the two brothers continued their involvement with the Menninger Foundation and Clinic, although many of the clinic’s operations were reduced in 2000. At a time when many institutions sought to reduce treatment costs, the psychoanalytical approach pioneered by the Menningers came to be seen as time consuming and expensive. In 2002 the Menninger Clinic coordinated its teaching and research activities with the Methodist Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas. In 2003 the clinic moved from Topeka to Houston, where it continued to provide a range of diagnostic and speciality inpatient programs for various age groups.
