Montefeltro Family,   noble family of Urbino, a city in the Italian Marches, southeast of Florence, that rose to become a ruling dynasty and produced several outstanding political and military leaders from the 13th to the 16th century. Descendants of an older noble family, they took their name from the ancient town of Mons Feretri, later San Leo, where they first rose to prominence.
By 1234 the family ruled Urbino. During the remainder of the 13th and early 14th centuries the family was prominent on the Ghibelline (imperial) side in the struggle between emperor and pope. Guido da Montefeltro, mentioned in Dante’s Inferno, fought against the Guelf (papal) party in Romagna and Tuscany before submitting to Pope Boniface VIII in 1295; he died a Franciscan monk in 1298. His son Federigo sustained the Ghibelline cause in north central Italy and ruled Urbino until 1322, when he was killed in an insurrection. His son Nolfo temporarily recovered Urbino but in the end lost it to the papal party.
Nolfo’s grandson Antonio (died 1403) recovered the family power once more (1377) and even extended it to neighbouring towns, making peace with the pope, who named him vicar, a title he successfully passed on to his son Guidantonio (died 1443). The latter’s marriage to a daughter of the papal-related Colonna family cemented the new alliance, and papal support assisted the Montefeltro in resisting the Malatesta family, lords of Rimini. Guidantonio’s illegitimate son Federico (1422–82) became an outstanding military leader, captaining the papal army against the Malatesta and his own against the pope, and suppressing a revolt in Volterra as a mercenary in the pay of Lorenzo de’ Medici. He spent his war profits on monumental building, on a library, and on art. Pope Sixtus IV made him duke of Urbino in 1474. Federico’s son Guidobaldo was the last ruling Montefeltro; dispossessed by Cesare Borgia in 1502, he recovered his state, but being without heirs adopted his nephew Francesco Maria della Rovere, into whose family Urbino then passed. His court, a notable centre of culture, is commemorated in Baldassare Castiglione’s Il cortegiano (1528). 
