Mughal dynasty, Mughal also spelled Mogul, Persian Mughūl (“Mongol”),  Muslim dynasty of Turkic-Mongol origin that ruled most of northern India from the early 16th to the mid-18th century. After that time it continued to exist as a considerably reduced and increasingly powerless entity until the mid-19th century. The Mughal dynasty was notable for its more than two centuries of effective rule over much of India; for the ability of its rulers, who through seven generations maintained a record of unusual talent; and for its administrative organization. A further distinction was the attempt of the Mughals, who were Muslims, to integrate Hindus and Muslims into a united Indian state.
The dynasty was founded by a Chagatai Turkic prince named Bābur (reigned 1526–30), who was descended from the Turkic conqueror Timur (Tamerlane) on his father’s side and from Chagatai, second son of the Mongol ruler Genghis Khan, on his mother’s side. Bābur’s father, ʿUmar Shaykh Mīrzā, ruled the small principality of Fergana to the north of the Hindu Kush mountain range; Bābur inherited the principality at a young age, in 1494.
In 1504 he conquered Kabul and Ghaznī and established himself there. In 1511 he captured Samarkand, only to realize that, with the formidable Safavid dynasty in Iran and the Uzbeks in Central Asia, he should rather turn to the southeast toward India to have an empire of his own. As a Timurid, Bābur had an eye on the Punjab, part of which had been Timur’s possession. He made several excursions in the tribal habitats there. Between 1519 and 1524—when he invaded Bhera, Sialkot, and Lahore—he showed his definite intention to conquer Hindustan, where the political scene favoured his adventure.
Having secured the Punjab, Bābur advanced toward Delhi, garnering support from many Delhi nobles. He routed two advance troop contingents of Ibrāhīm Lodī, Delhi’s sultan, and met the sultan’s main army at the First Battle of Panipat. By April 1526 he was in control of Delhi and Agra and held the keys to conquer Hindustan.
The Rajput confederacy, however, under Rana Sanga of Mewar threatened to revive their power in northern India. Bābur led an expedition against the rana and crushed the rana’s forces at Khanua, near Fatehpur Sikri (March 1527), once again by means of the skillful positioning of troops. Bābur then continued his campaigns to subjugate the Rajputs of Chanderi. When Afghan risings turned him to the east, he had to fight, among others, the joint forces of the Afghans and the sultan of Bengal in 1529 at Ghaghara, near Varanasi. Bābur won the battles, but the expedition there too, like the one on the southern borders, was left unfinished. Developments in Central Asia and Bābur’s failing health forced him to withdraw. He died near Lahore in December 1530.
Bābur’s son Humāyūn inherited the hope rather than the fact of empire, because the Afghans and Rajputs were merely restrained but not reconciled to Mughal supremacy by the Mughal victories at Panipat (1526), Khanua (1527), and the Ghaghara (1529). Bahādur Shah of Gujarat, encouraged by Afghan and Mughal émigrés, challenged the Mughals in Rajasthan, and, although Humāyūn occupied Gujarat in 1535, the danger there ended only with Bahādur’s death in 1537. Meanwhile, an Afghan soldier of fortune, Shēr Shah of Sūr, had consolidated his power in Bihar and Bengal. He defeated Humāyūn at Chausa in 1539 and at Kannauj in 1540, expelling him from India.
Reaching Iran in 1544, Humāyūn was granted military aid by Shah Ṭahmāsp and went on to conquer Kandahār (1545) and to seize Kabul three times from his own disloyal brother, Kāmrān, the final time being in 1550. Taking advantage of civil wars among the descendants of Shēr Shah, Humāyūn captured Lahore in February 1555, and, after defeating Sikandar Sūr, the rebel Afghan governor of the Punjab, at Sirhind, he recovered Delhi and Agra that July. Humāyūn was fatally injured by falling down the staircase of his library. His tomb in Delhi, built several years after his death, is the first of the great Mughal architectural masterpieces; it was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1993.
Within a few months of Humāyūn’s death, his governors lost several important cities and regions, including Delhi itself, to Hemu, a Hindu minister who had claimed the throne for himself. Humāyūn’s son Akbar (reigned 1556–1605), under the guidance of the regent Bayram Khan, defeated Hemu at the Second Battle of Panipat (1556), which commanded the route to Delhi, and thereby turned the tide in Hindustan to the Mughal dynasty’s favour.
Although Akbar inherited an empire in shambles, he proved an extremely capable ruler. His expansion and absorption of vast territories established an empire across northern and parts of central India; at his death in 1605 the empire extended from Afghanistan to the Bay of Bengal and southward to what is now Gujarat state and the northern Deccan region (peninsular India). The political, administrative, and military structures that he created to govern the empire were the chief factor behind its continued survival for another century and a half.
One of the notable features of Akbar’s government was the extent of Hindu, and particularly Rajput, participation. Rajput princes attained the highest ranks, as generals and as provincial governors, in the Mughal service. Discrimination against non-Muslims was reduced by abolishing the taxation of pilgrims and the tax payable by non-Muslims (jizyah) in lieu of military service. Yet Akbar was far more successful than any previous Muslim ruler in winning the cooperation of Hindus at all levels in his administration. The further expansion of his territories gave them fresh opportunities.
The incorporation of the zealously independent Hindu Rajputs inhabiting the rugged hilly Rajputana region came about through a policy of conciliation and conquest. When in 1562 Raja Bihari Mal of Amber (now Jaipur), threatened by a succession dispute, offered Akbar his daughter in marriage, Akbar accepted the offer. The raja acknowledged Akbar’s suzerainty, and his sons prospered in Akbar’s service. Akbar followed the same feudal policy toward the other Rajput chiefs. They were allowed to hold their ancestral territories, provided that they acknowledged Akbar as emperor, paid tribute, supplied troops when required, and concluded a marriage alliance with him. The emperor’s service was also opened to them and their sons, which offered financial rewards as well as honour. However, Akbar showed no mercy to those who refused to acknowledge his supremacy; after protracted fighting in Mewar, Akbar captured the historic fortress of Chitor (now Chittaurgarh) in 1568 and massacred its inhabitants.
Meanwhile, Akbar needed a way to maintain his status as a Muslim ruler while eliciting active support from his now predominantly non-Muslim subjects. In addition to annulling the jizyah, he abolished the practice of forcibly converting prisoners of war to Islam and encouraged Hindus as his principal confidants and policy makers. To legitimize his nonsectarian policies, he issued in 1579 a public edict (maḥẓar) declaring his right to be the supreme arbiter in Muslim religious matters—above the body of Muslim religious scholars and jurists, whom Akbar had come to consider as shallow. He had by then also undertaken a number of stern measures to reform the administration of religious grants, which were now available to learned and pious men of all religions, including Hindu pandits, Jain and Christian missionaries, and Parsi priests. The emperor created a new order commonly called the Dīn-e Ilāhī (“Divine Faith”), which was modeled on the Muslim mystical Sufi brotherhood but was devised with the object of forging the diverse groups in the service of the state into one cohesive political community.
Other notable features of Akbar’s government included the streamlining of both military and civil administration. He consolidated military ranks into a standard system under his authority, and regular checks on rank holders (manṣabdārs) ensured a reasonable correlation between their obligations and their income. He also seems to have instituted more efficient revenue assessment and collection in an effort to safeguard the peasants from excessive demands and the state from loss of money.
Toward the end of his reign, Akbar embarked on a fresh round of conquests. The Kashmir region was subjugated in 1586, Sindh in 1591, and Kandahār (Afghanistan) in 1595. Mughal troops now moved south of the Vindhya Range into the Deccan. By 1601 Khandesh, Berar, and part of Ahmadnagar had been added to Akbar’s empire. His last years were troubled by the rebellious behaviour of his son Prince Salīm (later the emperor Jahāngīr), who was eager for power.
Akbar’s son Jahāngīr (reigned 1605–27) continued both his father’s administrative system and his tolerant policy toward Hinduism. His most significant achievement in his own right was the cessation of the conflict with Mewar, a Rajput principality that had eluded Akbar’s subjugation. Its rana accepted Jahāngīr as suzerain but retained greater independence than the other principalities.
In 1611 he married Mehr al-Nesāʾ, who was afterward known as Nūr Jahān. His third son, Prince Khurram (later the emperor Shah Jāhan), married her niece Arjūmand Bānū Begum (Mumtāz Maḥal) the following year. When Jahāngīr left Agra in 1613 for several years to pursue campaigns in the south, Nūr Jahān—along with her father, Iʿtimād al-Dawlah (Mirzā Ghiyās Beg); her brother Āṣaf Khan (Arjūmand’s father); and her niece’s husband, Prince Khurram—became heavily influential, if not decisive, in the royal court. After Jahāngīr’s return, his health deteriorated. Nūr Jahān took charge of many of the ruler’s duties and even issued farmāns (sovereign mandates) in her name. But, after her attempt to arrange her son-in-law as Jahāngīr’s successor, she stoked the ire of Prince Khurram and Āṣaf Khan. Upon Jahāngīr’s death, she was held in confinement for the remainder of her life.
Prince Khurram succeeded in attaining the throne and took on the regnal name Shah Jahān (reigned 1628–58). His reign was notable for successes against the Deccan states. By 1636 Ahmadnagar had been annexed and Golconda and Bijapur (Vijayapura) forced to become tributaries. Mughal power was also temporarily extended in the northwest. In 1638 the Persian governor of Kandahār, ʿAlī Mardān Khan, surrendered that fortress to the Mughals. In 1646 Mughal forces occupied Badakhshān and Balkh, but in 1647 Balkh was relinquished, and attempts to reconquer it in 1649, 1652, and 1653 failed. The Persians reconquered Kandahār in 1649. Shah Jahān transferred his capital from Agra to Delhi in 1648, creating the new city of Shāhjahānābād there.
Shah Jahān had an almost insatiable passion for building (see Shah Jahān period architecture). At his first capital, Agra, he undertook the building of two great mosques, the Motī Masjid (Pearl Mosque) and the Jāmiʿ Masjid (Great Mosque) of Agra. The Taj Mahal, also in Agra, is the masterpiece of his reign and was erected in memory of his wife Arjūmand (Mumtāz Maḥal). At Delhi, Shah Jahān built a huge fortress-palace complex called the Red Fort as well as another Jāmiʿ Masjid, which is among the finest mosques in India. Shah Jahān’s reign was also a period of great literary activity, and the arts of painting and calligraphy were not neglected. His court was one of great pomp and splendour, and his collection of jewels was probably the most magnificent in the world. But his expeditions against Balkh and Badakhshān and his attempts to recover Kandahār brought the empire to the verge of bankruptcy.
When Shah Jahān fell ill in September 1657, his sons Dārā, Shujāʿ, Aurangzeb, and Murād each sought the throne. A protracted war of succession left Aurangzeb the sole victor and one of his brothers dead; the other two were executed.
Aurangzeb (reigned 1658–1707) expanded the empire to its greatest extent, particularly after annexing the Muslim Deccan kingdoms of Bijapur (1686) and Golconda (1687), but his political and religious intolerance also laid the seeds of its decline. In the first decades of his long reign, Aurangzeb continued his predecessors’ recipe for conquest: defeat one’s enemies, reconcile them, and place them in imperial service. Thus, the Maratha chief Shivaji was compelled into vassalage upon his defeat in 1666. Later that same year, however, he escaped the Mughal court and challenged the Mughal Empire anew. His elaborate coronation in 1674, complete with Hindu religious consecration (abhisheka), rallied many Hindus to his cause; his successful rise also gained the attention and cooperation of Muslim sultans in the Deccan.
Aside from this already formidable challenge, the Mughals faced several rebellions, and Aurangzeb’s attitude and policy began to harden. He excluded Hindus from public office and destroyed their schools and temples, while his persecution of the Sikhs of the Punjab turned that sect against Muslim rule (most notably under the leadership of Guru Gobind Singh) and roused rebellions among the Rajputs, Sikhs, and Marathas. The heavy taxes levied by Aurangzeb (including the reimposition of the jizyah) steadily impoverished the farming population, the abundant commissioning of manṣabdārs far outstripped the empire’s growth in area or revenues, and a steady decay in the quality of Mughal government was thus matched by a corresponding economic decline. When Aurangzeb died in 1707, he had failed to crush the Marathas of the Deccan, his authority was disputed throughout his dominions, and Mughal governance was collapsing under its own weight.
Aurangzeb’s successors were plagued by instability and financial woes. Rebellions and external challenges continued under Bahādur Shah I (1707–12), whose poor fiscal management resembled that of Aurangzeb. Farrukh-Siyār (1713–19) acceded to the throne after a war of succession, assisted by two highly influential governors; his reign ended after those same agents, now his vizier and chief military commander, conspired with the ruler of Jodhpur to assassinate him.
The dynastic centre found itself more and more vulnerable, and the court was increasingly dependent on revenue and support from its governors. During the reign of Muḥammad Shah (1719–48), the empire began to break up, a process hastened by dynastic warfare, factional rivalries, and the Iranian conqueror Nādir Shah’s brief but disruptive invasion of northern India in 1739. After the death of Muḥammad Shah in 1748, the Marathas overran almost all of northern India. Mughal rule was reduced to only a small area around Delhi, which passed under Maratha (1785) and then British (1803) control. The last Mughal, Bahādur Shah II (reigned 1837–57), was exiled to Yangon, Myanmar (Rangoon, Burma), by the British after his involvement with the Indian Mutiny of 1857–58.
