Najāḥid Dynasty,   Muslim dynasty of Ethiopian Mamlūks (slaves) that ruled Yemen in the period 1022–1158 from its capital at Zabīd. The Ziyādid kingdom at Zabīd (819–1018) had in its final years been controlled by Mamlūk viziers, the last of whom divided Yemen between two slaves, Nafīs and Najāḥ. Nafīs murdered the last Ziyādid ruler in 1018, and, after several years of bitter fighting and the death of Nafīs, Najāḥ emerged victorious and took control of Zabīd early in 1022. Najāḥ obtained the recognition of the ʿAbbāsid caliph and established his rule over the Tihāmah (coastal lands), though the highlands, a stronghold of tribal chieftains, remained recalcitrant. Najāḥ’s murder c. 1060 threw the kingdom into chaos, allowing the Ṣulayḥid ruler ʿAlī to take Zabīd, and reduced Najāḥid history to a series of intrigues.
Two of Najāḥ’s sons, Saʿīd and Jayyāsh, who had fled the capital, plotted to restore themselves to the Najāḥid throne and in 1081 killed ʿAlī. Saʿīd, supported by the large Ethiopian Mamlūk population, easily secured control of Zabīd. ʿAlī’s son al-Mukarram, however, heavily influenced by his mother, took Zabīd c. 1083, forcing the Najāḥids to flee again. Saʿīd regained power briefly (1086–88) but was finally murdered by al-Mukarram’s wife as-Sayyidah. Jayyāsh, meanwhile, had fled to India. He returned in disguise and assumed power with little difficulty, restoring equilibrium to the Yemeni kingdom during his reign (1089–c. 1106). After much family feuding over a successor to Jayyāsh, his grandson al-Manṣūr was installed in Zabīd c. 1111 by the Ṣulayḥids as their vassal. Manṣūr was poisoned in 1123 by his Mamlūk vizier Mann Allāh, who proceeded to fight off an attempted invasion by the Fāṭimids of Egypt and to reduce the Najāḥid ruler to a puppet figure. The Yemeni government passed from one Mamlūk vizier to another after Mann Allāh’s murder in 1130, as rival factions struggled among themselves for primacy. The threat of ʿAli ibn Mahdī, a Khārijite (member of a puritanical and fanatical Islāmic sect) who had murdered the vizier Surūr in 1156, forced the Ethiopians to seek outside help from the Zaydī imām of Ṣanʿāʾ, Aḥmad al-Mutawakkil, and to agree to recognize him as ruler of Zabīd. The Ethiopians were, however, defeated, and ʿAli ibn Mahdī took the Najāḥid capital in 1159. 
