Nguyen Dynasty,   (1802–1945), the last Vietnamese dynasty, which was founded and dominated by the powerful Nguyen family. The Nguyen family emerged into prominence in the 16th century, when Vietnam was under the Le dynasty (see Later Le dynasty).
After Mac Dang Dung usurped the Vietnamese throne in 1527, Nguyen Kim fought to restore a Le emperor in 1533, leaving the Mac family in power in the northern section of the country. Members of the Nguyen family acted as mayors of the palace to the weak Le rulers, but by the mid-16th century this role passed to the Trinh family (q.v.), and Nguyen power became associated with the southernmost sections of the Vietnamese state. Long-standing rivalry between the Nguyen and the Trinh became open warfare in 1620, with hostilities continuing intermittently until 1673. By that date both families accepted a de facto division of the Vietnamese state.
Although never accorded royal status by the Chinese, the Nguyen ruled over southern Vietnam in an essentially independent fashion. During the 17th and 18th centuries the Nguyen encouraged Vietnamese settlement into lands formerly occupied by the Chams and the Cambodians. Much of the settlement of Cham and Cambodian lands, however, was done by Chinese refugees fleeing the collapse of the Ming dynasty. The Chinese were actively courted by the Nguyen, who were in desperate need of manpower in order to resist the encroachment of their northern rivals, the Trinh, and to expand their territorial base southward. Cho-lon, Bien Hoa, and many other towns in the Mekong River delta and along the southern coast were founded at this time on the sites of Chinese emporia (phô). 
Nguyen power in southern Vietnam was challenged and nearly eclipsed by the revolt of the Tay Son brothers (q.v.) that broke out in 1771. A young prince, Nguyen Anh, survived to lead an eventual recovery of Nguyen territory and finally to become the emperor Gia Long (q.v.), who ruled over the whole of Vietnam from 1802 and was the founder of the Nguyen dynasty.
Modeling their administration after that of the Chinese Ch’ing dynasty (1644–1911), the Nguyen, particularly after Gia Long’s death in 1820, followed a conservative policy that opposed foreign missionary activity in Vietnam. The French, partly as a result of this antimissionary policy, invaded Vietnam in 1858, initially landing at Tourane (Da Nang), and then establishing a base at Saigon. They forced the emperor Tu Duc (q.v.), then facing revolts elsewhere, to cede the three eastern provinces of southern Vietnam, called Cochinchina (q.v.) by the French, to France in 1862. Five years later the French gained control of all Cochinchina. French control over the whole of Vietnam was established following invasions in 1883–85, and Vietnam’s ancient vassalage relationship with China was ended. The Nguyen dynasty was, however, retained in Hue with nominal control over central Vietnam, called Annam (q.v.) by the French, and over northern Vietnam, called Tonkin (q.v.). Cochinchina, in contrast, had the status of a colony. The French continued to dominate the throne until 1945, when the last emperor, Bao Dai (q.v.), abdicated, following the Vietnamese Nationalist forces’ proclamation of independence. Bao Dai served as chief of state from 1949 until he was deposed by Ngo Dinh Diem in a national referendum in 1955. 
