Polenta Family,   Italian noble family, named for its castle of Polenta (located in the Romagna, southwest of Cesena), which dominated the city-state of Ravenna from the end of the 13th century to the middle of the 15th. The family’s ascendancy began with Guido da Polenta (d. 1310), known as Guido Minore, or Guido the Old, who led the Guelf, or pro-papal, faction in Ravenna against the Ghibelline, or pro-emperor, faction. Ravenna, traditionally Ghibelline, had fallen to the Guelfs in 1239. When the emperor Frederick II reconquered the city in the following year, Guido’s father, Lamberto, was imprisoned and executed. In 1275 Guido, with the aid of the Malatesta family of nearby Rimini, seized the town, driving out rival factions.
After the Romagna (the territory of Ravenna) fell under direct papal administration in 1278, Guido consolidated his power and after 1285 began to resist papal encroachment. In 1290, when Guido was in Florence serving as chief magistrate, the papal official Stefano Colonna arrived in Ravenna to demand that the town surrender to his authority. Guido’s sons Lamberto and Bernardino imprisoned him, kindling a revolt against papal power in the Romagna. Elected chief magistrate of Ravenna from 1286 to 1290 and again in 1292 and 1293, Guido was a strong ruler, repelling outside enemies and suppressing factions within the town.
Guido’s political alliance with the Malatesta family led him to marry his daughter Francesca to Gianciotto Malatesta about 1275. In 1283 or 1284 Gianciotto murdered both Francesca and his brother Paolo when he discovered they were lovers. The adulterous Francesca and Paolo are among the sinners described in Dante’s The Divine Comedy. The tragic story of Francesca da Rimini has also inspired, among others, plays by Silvio Pellico and Gabriele D’Annunzio, operas by Hermann Götz and Sergey V. Rachmaninoff, and paintings by J.-A.-D. Ingres and George F. Watts.
Guido’s grandson, and Francesca’s nephew, Guido Novello da Polenta was a patron of the arts known as the host of Dante during his final years of exile (c. 1318–21). He was himself also a scholar and poet. In 1322 Guido Novello was chosen captain of the people in Bologna and left his brother Rinaldo, the archbishop, to govern Ravenna in his place; but his cousin Ostasio da Polenta assassinated Rinaldo and made himself lord of the city. With Bolognese aid, Guido Novello tried to recover Ravenna the following year but was defeated and ended his life in exile.
Ostasio was also a patron of letters, befriending Boccaccio in 1345–46, but his politics were violent. In 1326 he had seized Cervia, south of Ravenna, killing his uncle and cousin. The tradition was continued by his descendants. His son Bernardino punished a conspiracy of his brothers by starving them to death (1347). In 1390 Bernardino’s son Guido was deposed by his own sons and starved to death; one of the sons, Obizzo, then killed the others. During Obizzo’s rule, Ravenna began to fall under the power of Venice, and he was forced in 1410 to accept a Venetian chief magistrate. In 1441 the da Polenta family yielded the city to Venice, Obizzo’s son and grandson taking refuge in Crete, where they died not long after, the last of their line.
