Samanid dynasty,  (819–999 ce), Iranian dynasty that arose in what is now eastern Iran and Uzbekistan. It was renowned for the impulse that it gave to Iranian national sentiment and learning.
The four grandsons of the dynasty’s founder, Sāmān-Khodā, had been rewarded with provinces for their faithful service to the Abbasid caliph al-Maʾmūn: Nūḥ obtained Samarkand; Aḥmad, Fergana; Yaḥyā, Shāsh (Tashkent); and Elyās, Herāt. Aḥmad’s son Naṣr became governor of Transoxania in 875, but it was his brother and successor, Ismāʿīl I (892–907), who overthrew the Ṣaffārids in Khorāsān (900) and the Zaydis of Ṭabaristān, thus establishing a semiautonomous rule over Transoxania and Khorāsān, with Bukhara as his capital.
Under the loosely centralized feudal government of the Samanids, Transoxania and Khorāsān prospered, with a notable expansion of industry and commerce, attested by the use of Samanid silver coins as currency throughout northern Asia. The main cities of Samarkand and Bukhara became cultural centres. Persian literature flourished in the works of the poets Rūdakī and Ferdowsī, philosophy and history were encouraged, and the foundations of Iranian Islamic culture were laid.
The most important contribution of the Samanid age to Islamic art is the pottery produced at Nīshāpūr and Samarkand. The Samanids developed a technique known as slip painting: mixing semifluid clay (slip) with their colours to prevent the designs from running when fired with the thin fluid glazes used at that time. Bowls and simple plates were the most common forms made by Samanid potters. The potters employed stylized Sasanian motifs such as horsemen, birds, lions, and bulls’ heads as well as Arabic calligraphic design. Polychrome pieces usually had a buff or red body with designs of several colours, bright yellows, greens, black, purples, and reds being the most common. Many pottery pieces were produced at Nīshāpūr, however, with only a single line on a white background. The art of bronze casting and other forms of metalwork also flourished at Nishāpūr throughout the Samanid period.
Although few Samanid buildings have survived, a Samanid mausoleum identified with Ismāʿīl (which in fact houses several bodies), still standing in Bukhara, shows the originality of the architecture of the era. The perfectly symmetrical mausoleum is constructed entirely of brick; brick is also used to form decorative patterns in relief, based on the position and direction of each architectural unit.
From the mid-10th century, Samanid power was gradually undermined, economically by the interruption of the northern trade and politically by a struggle with a confederation of disaffected nobles. Weakened, the Samanids became vulnerable to pressure from the rising Turkic powers in Central Asia and Afghanistan. Nūḥ II (976–997), to retain at least nominal control, confirmed Sebüktigin, a former Turkic slave, as semi-independent ruler of Ghazna (modern Ghaznī, Afghanistan) and appointed his son Maḥmūd governor of Khorāsān. But the Turkic Qarakhanids, who then occupied the greater part of Transoxania, allied with Maḥmūd and deposed the Samanid Manṣūr II, taking possession of Khorāsān. Bukhara fell in 999, and the last Samanid, Ismāʿīl II, after a five-year struggle against the Ghaznavid Maḥmūd and the Qarakhanids, was assassinated in 1005.
