Sangallo family,  family of outstanding Florentine Renaissance architects. Its most prominent members were Antonio da Sangallo the Elder; his elder brother Giuliano da Sangallo; Antonio (Giamberti) da Sangallo the Younger, the nephew of Giuliano and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder; and Francesco da Sangallo, the son of Giuliano.
Giuliano da Sangallo (1445?–1516) was an architect, sculptor, and military engineer whose masterpiece, a church of Greek-cross plan, Santa Maria delle Carceri in Prato (1485–91), was strongly influenced by Filippo Brunelleschi. It is the purest, most classic expression of that style of 15th-century architecture. Giuliano worked for the powerful Medici family in Florence and built their villa at Poggio a Caiano in 1485. As a military engineer he was effective in the defense of Florence against Naples in 1478. In Rome Giuliano worked on the design of St. Peter’s Basilica, but he was overshadowed by Donato Bramante. He designed influential facade projects for San Lorenzo, Florence, in 1515–16.
Antonio da Sangallo the Elder (1455–1535), a military architect in his younger years, is best known for the major work of his life, the pilgrimage church of the Madonna di San Biago at Montepulciano, a tiny but important cultural centre of Tuscany. An ideal central-plan church (i.e., one symmetrical about a central point) of the High Renaissance, it also is a Greek-cross plan built of travertine and designed with three facades; the west tower was never completed, but the east tower stands, and, with the church placed on a peak overlooking the valley, it is a majestic sight.
Antonio da Sangallo the Younger (1484–1546) was the most influential architect of his time. He arrived in Rome when he was about 20 and built a town house for the cardinal Alessandro Farnese in 1513. When the cardinal became Pope Paul III, he had Antonio the Younger enlarge it into the most important palace in Rome, the Palazzo Farnese (1534–46). A fortresslike 16th-century Florentine palace, this structure was representative of a type of building on which a code of academic rules was based, exercising an immense influence well into the 19th century. The inner court of the palace is entered through an arch entrance, and the carriageway, lined with Roman Doric order antique granite columns, is a superior design. Antonio borrowed from the ancient Roman architectural motifs of the Colosseum and the Theatre Marcellus, but Michelangelo made changes in Antonio’s designs.
Throughout his career, Antonio worked on St. Peter’s, first as Bramante’s assistant and in 1520 as chief architect. His wooden model of St. Peter’s (1539–46), commissioned by Pope Paul III, still stands in the Vatican Museum.
Francesco da Sangallo, known as Il Margotta (1494–1576), the son of Giuliano, was primarily a sculptor whose style was characterized by minute detailing. He sculpted the tomb of Bishop Marzi-Medici (1546) in the church of Santissima Annunziata, Florence, as well as the tomb of Bishop Bonofede (1550) in the Certosa di Val d’Ema, near Florence.
