Satavahana dynasty,  Indian family that, according to some interpretations based on the Puranas (ancient religious and legendary writings), belonged to the Andhra jati (“tribe”) and was the first Deccanese dynasty to build an empire in daksinapatha—i.e., the southern region. At the height of their power, the Satavahanas held distant areas of western and central India.
On the strength of Puranic evidence, the beginnings of Satavahana ascendancy can be dated to late in the 1st century bce, although some authorities trace the family to the 3rd century bce. Initially, Satavahana rule was limited to certain areas of the western Deccan. Inscriptions found in caves, such as those at Nanaghat, Nashik, Karli, and Kanheri, commemorate the early rulers Simuka, Krishna, and Shatakarni I.
The accessibility, from the early Satavahana kingdom, of the western coastal ports, which prospered in this period of Indo-Roman trade, and the close territorial proximity with the western Kshatrapas resulted in an almost uninterrupted series of wars between the two Indian kingdoms. The first stage of this conflict is represented by Kshatrapa Nahapana’s penetration into the Nashik and other areas of the western Deccan. Satavahana power was revived by Gautamiputra Shatakarni (reigned c. 106–130 ce), the greatest ruler of the family. His conquests ranged over a vast territorial expanse stretching from Rajasthan in the northwest to Andhra in the southeast and from Gujarat in the west to Kalinga in the east. Sometime before 150, the Kshatrapas recovered most of these areas from the Satavahanas and twice inflicted defeats upon them.
Gautamiputra’s son Vashisthiputra Pulumavi (reigned c. 130–159) ruled from the west. The tendency seems to have been to expand to the east and the northeast. Inscriptions and coins of Vashisthiputra Pulumavi are also found in Andhra, and Shivashri Shatakarni (reigned c. 159–166) is known from coins found in the Krishna and Godavari regions. The distribution area of Shri Yajna Shatakarni’s (reigned c. 174–203) regional coins is also spread over Krishna and Godavari, as well as the Chanda region of Madhya Pradesh, Berar, northern Konkan, and Saurashtra.
Shri Yajna is the last important figure in the history of the Satavahana dynasty. He achieved success against the Kshatrapas, but his successors, known mostly from Puranic genealogical accounts and coins, ruled over a comparatively limited area.
The “local” character of later numismatic issues and their distribution pattern indicates the subsequent fragmentation of the Satavahana empire. The Andhra region passed on first to the Iksvakus and then to the Pallavas. Different areas in the western Deccan experienced the emergence of new local powers—e.g., the Cutus, the Abhiras, and the Kurus. In the Berar region the Vakatakas emerged as a formidable political force in the early 4th century. By this period the dismemberment of the Satavahana empire was complete.
Despite the achievements of the northern Mauryas in the Deccan in the 4th–3rd century bce, it was under the Satavahanas that the historical period proper began in this region. Although there are no clear indications as to whether a centralized administrative system was evolved, an extensive system of currency was introduced throughout the empire. The Indo-Roman trade reached its peak in this period, and the resultant material prosperity is reflected in the liberal patronage of Buddhist and Brahmanical communities, enumerated in contemporary inscriptions.
