Sforza Family,  Italian family, first named Attendoli, that produced two famous soldiers of fortune and founded a dynasty that ruled Milan for almost a century.
The Attendoli were prosperous farmers of the Romagna (near Ravenna) who first assumed the name Sforza (“Force”) with the founder of the dynasty, the condottiere Muzio Attendolo (1369–1424). Muzio’s illegitimate son Francesco Sforza, also a condottiere, became duke of Milan in 1450 through his marriage to the daughter of Duke Filippo Maria Visconti.
Francesco’s eldest son, Galeazzo Maria Sforza (1444–76), succeeded his father in 1466. Though traditionally characterized as despotic, extravagant, and dissolute, Galeazzo Maria was apparently a capable ruler who took an active interest in agriculture, constructed canals for irrigation and transportation, introduced the cultivation of rice, and encouraged commerce, particularly the manufacture of silk and wool. He was a patron of musicians, artists, poets, and scholars, and himself wrote treatises on hunting. In foreign policy, however, he followed an indecisive course that ended in Milan’s virtual isolation.
Galeazzo Maria was assassinated during Christmas festivities by three conspirators who vainly hoped to set the stage for a popular insurrection. But the murder left Milan to the uncertainties of the regency of his widow, Bona of Savoy, who ruled with the aid of an unpopular chancellor, Cicco Simonetta, and to the brief, troubled reign of Galeazzo’s son Gian Galeazzo (1469–94), whose power was soon usurped by his uncle Ludovico the Moor.
After Ludovico was driven from power by Louis XII of France in 1499, his sons Massimiliano (1493–1530) and Francesco Maria (1495–1535) took refuge in Germany. In 1513, backed by the Swiss, Massimiliano returned to Milan. Three years later Francis I of France attacked the city. The Milanese and their Swiss allies were defeated by French and Venetian troops at Marignano, southeast of Milan, and Massimiliano yielded the duchy to Francis, retiring to Paris to live on a pension. Francesco escaped north to Trento, returning to be set up as duke of Milan in 1522 by Emperor Charles V, after the defeat of the French at the Battle of Bicocca (north of Milan). Francesco’s death without heirs ended the ducal male line, and the duchy passed to Charles V and the Habsburgs.
Several other branches of the Sforza family survived, the descendants of Sforza Secondo (an illegitimate son of Francesco Sforza) becoming the counts Sforza, one of whom was the anti-Fascist statesman and foreign minister of Italy, Carlo Sforza (1873–1952).
