Shimazu Family,   powerful warrior clan that controlled the southern tip of the Japanese island of Kyushu from the 12th to the 19th century. Ensconced in their isolated stronghold on the frontier of Japan, the Shimazu were the only feudal family to play a leading role in Japanese history in both medieval and modern times. During the Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1867), the family’s Satsuma fief was the third largest in the country. Then, in the Meiji Restoration, Shimazu warriors, together with warriors loyal to the Mōri family in Chōshū, overthrew the Tokugawa in 1867 and established the new Imperial government. Men from the Satsuma fief continued to dominate the Japanese government until the close of World War I and the Japanese navy long afterward.
The Shimazu family was founded in the late 12th century by Shimazu Tadahisa (1179–1227), who adopted the surname of Shimazu after he was appointed governor of the southern portion of Kyushu. The clan prospered by taking advantage of trade with Korea and the Ryukyu Islands. By the 16th century the Shimazu had become the major power in southwestern Japan, and they also controlled most of the island of Kyushu.
The Shimazu family was finally defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1537–98) in 1587 in his efforts to reunify Japan. Hideyoshi allowed them to keep the southern part of their domain, and thereafter they became one of his staunchest allies. In 1600, however, the Shimazu clan joined the other great lords of western Japan in a futile effort to avoid the hegemony of Hideyoshi’s successor, Tokugawa Ieyasu (1543–1616). After the fighting ended, the Shimazu made peace with Ieyasu and were permitted to keep their relatively inaccessible domain.
In 1609 the Shimazu conquered the Ryukyu Islands and forced that territory to pay tribute to Satsuma. Since the Ryukyu islanders continued their traditional tributary trade with China, Satsuma had indirect access to Chinese luxury products. Although over the next 20 years the Tokugawa gradually imposed restrictions that closed Japan to almost all trade and intercourse with foreign countries, the Shimazu were able to continue their trade with the Ryukyu Islands.
The Shimazu also continued aloof from the Tokugawa and nourished a hatred for the Tokugawa house among their warriors. After Satsuma led the movement that overthrew the Tokugawa in 1867, the fief of Satsuma was dissolved and made into the Kagoshima prefecture of the new central government, which gave the head of the Shimazu clan the hereditary rank of prince.
