Stroganov Family,   wealthy Russian family of merchants, probably of Tatar origin, famous for their colonizing activities in the Urals and in Siberia in the 16th and 17th centuries. The earliest mention of the family occurs in 15th-century documents that refer to their trading in one of the provinces of Novgorod.
In 1515 Anika (Ioanniki) Stroganov started salt mining in Solvychegodsk; and in 1558 Tsar Ivan IV made a grant of lands along the Kama and Chusovaya rivers to Grigory Stroganov. The Stroganovs were allowed to attract inhabitants to those territories, to build towns, and to maintain their own armed forces for defense, and they were exempted from taxes for 20 years. They engaged in salt and iron mining and in the timber and fur trades and had extensive agricultural interests. They founded the town of Kankor in 1588 and that of Kergedan in 1564. In 1566 Yakov Stroganov petitioned Ivan IV to include the Stroganov estates in the oprichnina—i.e., in the crown land administered under the personal control of the tsar. This request was granted in August 1566. A new grant of land in 1568 considerably increased their estates.
The Stroganovs traded with Siberia, but complications in their relations with the khan of Siberia, Kuchum, led to operations of a military nature. They also occasionally had to take arms against the indigenous inhabitants, as in 1572. In 1574 Ivan IV summoned the Stroganovs to discuss plans for the future of Siberia. Two months later they received a grant of land in Siberia along the Tura and Tobol rivers. In 1581 the Stroganovs equipped the expedition of Yermak Timofeyevich, which was to lay the foundation for Russia’s annexation of Siberia.
During the Time of Troubles the Stroganovs were of great assistance to the second levy raised by Prince D.M. Pozharski and Kuzma Minin, whose activities brought about the accession of Michael Romanov to the tsardom in 1613. The Stroganovs supported Michael’s government, paying their taxes in advance and lending large sums to the empty treasury. They were rewarded by a rise in rank and became answerable for their actions to the tsar alone.
In 1688 Grigory Dmitriyevich Stroganov (1650–1715) became the sole owner of all the family’s vast estates. He built and equipped two naval vessels for Peter I the Great and aided him financially. He was made a baron. In 1798 the tsar Paul I raised Grigory Dmitriyevich’s heirs to the dignity of count. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries the family produced statesmen and other eminent persons who continued the tradition of service.
The Stroganovs also became famous for their services to Russian art. Their patronage and commissions resulted in the building of many churches and in the creation of the so-called Stroganov school of icon painting in the 16th and 17th centuries. This school—to which such famous painters as Prokopy Chirin, Istoma Savin, and the latter’s sons Nikofor and Nazari belonged—introduced the techniques of miniature painting as well as rich ornamentation and colouring and an extensive use of gold leaf.
