Toungoo Dynasty, also spelled Taungu,  ruling house in Myanmar (Burma) from the 15th or 16th to the 18th century, whose reign is known as the Second Burmese Empire. King Minkyinyo (1486–1531) of Toungoo is usually considered the founder of the dynasty, but many authorities believe that the distinction of founder should be reserved for his son Tabinshwehti (1531–50), who more surely welded the empire together. Thus the dating of the dynasty may be considered either 1486–1752 or 1531–1752.
Tabinshwehti first conquered the Mohnyin Shan peoples in northern Myanmar and thus eliminated one element of the fragmentation that had existed in Myanmar since the demise of the Pagan dynasty (1287). Consolidating his power in Toungoo, far up the Sittang River, Tabinshwehti pushed southward, overrunning the Irrawaddy delta region and crushing the Mon capital of Pegu (Bago). After defeating a Shan-led counterattack at Pyè (Prome) in 1544, Tabinshwehti was crowned as king of all Myanmar at the ancient capital of Pagan (Nyaung-U). He then began assembling an army for an attack on coastal Arakan to the west; although the Myanmar forces were defeated at Arakan, Tabinshwehti led his retreating army eastward to Ayutthaya to subdue rebellious Thai forces there. Again he was defeated. A period of unrest and rebellions among other conquered peoples followed, and Tabinshwehti was assassinated in 1551.
Bayinnaung (reigned 1551–81), Tabinshwehti’s brother-in-law, ascended the throne. An energetic leader and effective military commander, he made Toungoo Myanmar the most powerful state in Southeast Asia. After repeated campaigns, his conquests extended from Tavoy (Dawei) in the south to Shwebo in the north and from Ava eastward to Chieng Mai. Myanmar suzerainty even encompassed much of Laos and extended down the Mae Nam Chao Phraya valley to Ayutthaya, near Bangkok. Siam remained under Myanmar domination for 15 years.
Bayinnaung was poised to deliver a final, decisive assault on the kingdom of Arakan when he died in 1581. His successors were forced to quell rebellions in other parts of the kingdom, and the victory over Arakan was never achieved. Instead, the Myanmar empire gradually disintegrated. The Toungoo dynasty, however, survived for another century and a half, until the death of Mahadammayaza (reigned 1733–52), but never again ruled all of Myanmar.
