Vakataka dynasty,  Indian ruling house originating in the central Deccan in the mid-3rd century ce, the empire of which is believed to have extended from Malwa and Gujarat in the north to the Tungabhadra in the south and from the Arabian Sea in the west to the Bay of Bengal in the east. The Vakatakas, like many of the contemporary dynasties of the Deccan, claimed Brahmanical origin. Little is known, however, about Vindhyashakti (c. 250–270 ce), the founder of the family. Territorial expansion began in the reign of his son Pravarasena I, who came to the throne about 270 and reached the Narmada River in the north by annexing the kingdom of Purika.
Pravarasena’s kingdom was partitioned after his death. The main line continued with Rudrasena I (c. 330), his son Prithvisena I (c. 350), and Prithvisena’s son Rudrasena II (c. 400). In the period of Prithvisena the Vakatakas came into contact with the powerful Gupta family of North India, which was making a bid to expand in the west at the expense of the Western Kshatrapas. Because of its territorial position, the Vakataka family was recognized as a useful ally; Prabhavati Gupta, the daughter of Chandra Gupta II, was married to Rudrasena II. In this period, Gupta impact was significant in Vakataka polity and culture. Rudrasena’s death was followed by the lengthy regency of Prabhavati Gupta during the minority of her sons Divakarasena and Damodarasena. After the Guptas became involved in a war against the Hunas, the Vakataka dynasty was free to expand in central India, and in the period of Narendrasena (c. 450–470), son of Pravarasena II, Vakataka influence spread to such central Indian states as Kosala, Mekala, and Malava. This power, however, ultimately brought the Vakatakas into conflict with the Nalas and caused a setback to the family. Its power was temporarily revived in the reign of Prithvisena II, the last known king of the line, who acceded to the throne about 470.
Apart from this senior line was the Vatsagulma (Basim, in Akola district) line, which branched off after Pravarasena I and occupied the area between the Indhyadri Range and the Godavari River. The Vakatakas are noted for having encouraged arts and letters.
