Visconti Family,  Milanese family that dominated the history of northern Italy in the 14th and 15th centuries.
Originating in the minor nobility, the family probably obtained the hereditary office of viscount of Milan early in the 11th century, transforming the title into a surname. The Visconti gained ascendancy in Milan through Pope Urban IV, who appointed Ottone Visconti (1207–95) archbishop of Milan in 1262 to counterbalance the power of the ruling Della Torre family. Ottone defeated the Della Torre at the Battle of Desio (1277), claimed the old temporal powers of the archbishops of Milan, and gradually transferred authority to his grandnephew Matteo I (see Visconti, Matteo I).
Acquiring the titles of imperial vicar (representative of the empire) and signore (lord) of Milan, the Visconti extended their sovereignty over many north Italian cities, arousing the opposition of Pope John XXII, who placed Milan under interdict and went so far as to preach a crusade against the Visconti.
After Matteo’s abdication (1322) in favour of his son Galeazzo I (c. 1277–1328), the dynasty consolidated its power, continuing its territorial expansion and concluding marriage alliances with the rulers of other Italian cities and with princely families of France, Germany, and Savoy. When Galeazzo I was succeeded by his son Azzo (1302–39), peace was concluded with the pope (1329). A crisis created by Azzo’s death without heirs in 1339 was solved with the election of his uncles Luchino (1292–1349) and Giovanni (1290–1354), younger sons of Matteo I, as joint lords. Under their rule, territory lost during the struggle against the pope was regained, and the boundaries of the state were further extended. After Luchino’s death in 1349, the title of signore became hereditary. Giovanni Visconti, who also had become archbishop of Milan in 1342, continued as lord of Milan, while its territory was increased by the temporary annexation of Bologna and Genoa in the 1350s.
After Giovanni’s death, the Visconti dominions were shared among his three nephews. When Matteo II (c. 1319–55) died, Bernabò (1323–85) and Galeazzo II (c. 1321–78) divided Milan and its territory, Bernabò taking the eastern area and Galeazzo II the western. Established at Pavia (south of Milan), Galeazzo II became a patron of artists and poets, including Petrarch, and founded the University of Pavia. Ruling independently, the brothers pursued a coordinated policy, their territorial interests involving them in all the Italian wars of the time, mainly against Florence and the popes.
After Galeazzo II died in 1378, Bernabò contracted a military alliance with the French prince Louis of Anjou. In 1385 Galeazzo II’s son Gian Galeazzo seized Bernabò, who died in prison a few months later.
Under Gian Galeazzo the Visconti reached their greatest power. At his death in 1402, the Visconti were dukes of Milan and counts of Pavia, and the family controlled most of northern Italy (see Visconti, Gian Galeazzo). His rule was followed by the catastrophic reign of his elder son, Giovanni Maria (1388–1412), under whom Gian Galeazzo’s conquests were lost and many Lombard cities reverted to local lords. Described by contemporaries as incompetent and morbidly cruel, perhaps insane, Giovanni Maria was assassinated by conspirators in 1412.
His brother Filippo Maria (1392–1447), succeeding to the dukedom, managed, by marriage to the widow of the condottiere (mercenary captain) Facino Cane, to gain control of Cane’s troops and territories and gradually reconstructed the Visconti dominions. A neurotic recluse beset by bad health, Filippo Maria nevertheless succeeded in dominating Italian affairs. In Milan he reorganized the government finances and introduced the silk industry. In 1447, when a Venetian army advanced on Milan, Filippo Maria appealed for help to his son-in-law the condottiere Francesco Sforza, husband of his only daughter Bianca Maria. Filippo Maria died suddenly, however, leaving the duchy to be contested between Sforza and King Alfonso V of Aragon, whom Filippo Maria had designated his heir. Sforza won and soon restored the Visconti state under his own dynasty. Visconti governmental institutions survived into the 18th century, and, although the Visconti name disappeared with Bianca Maria, Visconti blood was transmitted through the female line to the great dynasties of Europe: the Valois of France, the Habsburgs of Austria and Spain, and the Tudors of England.
