Wood Family,   celebrated English family of Staffordshire potters, a major force in the development of Staffordshire wares from peasant pottery to an organized industry. The family’s most prominent members were Ralph Wood (1715–72), the “miller of Burslem”; his brother Aaron (1717–85); and his son Ralph, Jr. (1748–95). Through his mother, Ralph, Jr., was related to Josiah Wedgwood, and the two names were on a number of occasions associated professionally.
In 1730, Ralph Wood was apprenticed to John Astbury, and he subsequently worked with Thomas Whieldon at Fenton Low, there learning the manufacture of coloured glazes. He began producing his own salt-glazed wares in 1754 at Burslem, where he also practiced as a block cutter (i.e., a carver of the original patrix from which the potters’ working molds were taken). Aaron apprenticed with the Thomas Wedgwood, Jr., firm from 1731 to 1746, when he left to work with Whieldon. He opened his own pottery four years later.
By about 1760 Ralph Wood was making extremely well-modeled figures with coloured glazes. These started with a manganese-brown, to which he added greens, blues, and a greyish olive. Subjects were in great variety; the best is probably the equestrian “Hudibras” glazed in manganese and orange. The “Vicar and Moses,” afterward repeated by his son and many other potters, appeared at this time and enjoyed great popularity. Of the animals, the stags are particularly well-known. Wood was among the first of English potters to impress his name on his wares, and he is credited with introducing the Toby jug, his first model of the kind being “Toby Philpot” about 1762.
Ralph, Jr., produced a number of figures, both from his father’s molds and from new ones of a variety of subjects. His figures were coloured with enamels instead of glazes, and many of them were impressed with the mold number in the base. An extant invoice shows him supplying figures to Josiah Wedgwood in 1783. About this time or soon afterward, Wood appears to have employed Jean Voyez (c. 1740–after 1791), a modeler of French extraction who for a brief time had been employed by Wedgwood. Voyez probably modeled his “Fair Hebe” jug for Wood, and several models in the style of Paul-Louis Cyfflé of Lunéville may also be his.
Specimens made by the Woods, father and son, are sometimes impressed with a name, R. WOOD or R. WOOD BURSLEM being associated with the father and Ra. Wood/Burslem with the son, but this is uncertain.
For some years Ralph, Jr., was in partnership with his brother John (1746–97), but in 1787 John started his own pottery at Brownhills; 10 years later he was murdered by a rejected suitor for his daughter’s hand. Ralph Wood III (1781–1801) continued the firm after his father’s death.
William Wood (1746–1808), son of Aaron, was employed as a modeler by Wedgwood. His brilliant younger brother, Enoch (1759–1840), apprenticed with Wedgwood for a time and later with Humphrey Palmer. By 1783 Enoch was established in Burslem as an independent potter in partnership with his cousin Ralph Wood, and in 1790 he entered a partnership with James Caldwell, when the style of the firm became Wood & Caldwell.
In 1818 Enoch Wood continued alone, under the style Enoch Wood & Sons. The firm made all the wares that were current in Staffordshire at the time, including black basaltes, jasper, and probably porcelain. Large quantities of blueprinted earthenware were produced, much of which was exported to the United States. Busts modeled by Enoch Wood himself are fairly numerous. The Wood factory closed in 1846.
