Andrew Bird,  (born July 11, 1973, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.), American pop songwriter and multi-instrumentalist, known for his virtuosic skill on the violin, which he often sampled and looped onstage, and for his meticulously crafted songs that combine wistful melodies with hyperliterate lyrics.
Bird was immersed in music from early childhood. He began taking Suzuki-method violin lessons at age four and later earned a degree (1996) in violin performance from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. He chafed at the rigid expectations of the classical music world, however, and after graduation supported himself by playing his instrument everywhere from weddings to Renaissance fairs. Having developed an interest in vintage jazz, he soon fell in with the popular swing-revival band the Squirrel Nut Zippers, appearing on three of their albums in the late 1990s. In the meantime, he landed a recording contract of his own.
Andrew Bird’s Bowl of Fire, as his new Chicago-based band became known, won critical notice for its impressive command and fusion of early 20th-century musical idioms, drawing on traditions as varied as swing-era jazz, calypso, German cabaret, and Central European folk songs over the course of three full-length albums, Thrills (1998), Oh! The Grandeur (1999), and The Swimming Hour (2001). The band failed to catch on among audiences, though, and Bird consequently decided to strike out on his own.
After testing the waters with a series of solo gigs, Bird recorded Weather Systems (2003) at his family’s rural Illinois farm. The album marked a turning point in his songwriting; the idiosyncratic pre-rock-and-roll touches were now filtered through a sound that owed more to contemporary folk and pop-rock music than his previous pastiche-driven work had. (He also, notably, revealed a knack for whistling.) Bird expanded his fan base by frequently opening for more famous musicians (he called the 30-minute performances “guerrilla attacks”), and widespread praise for his next record, The Mysterious Production of Eggs (2005), brought him further attention. The success continued with the sprawling Armchair Apocrypha (2007), which sold more than 100,000 copies—a considerable number for an independent release. In 2009 Bird released Noble Beast, and its debut at number 12 on the Billboard album chart marked a career high. He returned with Break It Yourself (2012), which found him partially abandoning the oblique wordplay that distinguished his previous work in favour of greater emotional directness.
Bird later released the studio albums Are You Serious (2016) and My Finest Work Yet (2019). He also made a series of instrumental records, Echolocations: Canyons (2015) and Echolocations: River (2017), which feature site-specific compositions and accompanying short films.

