Billy Bragg, in full Steven William Bragg,  (born December 20, 1957, Barking, Essex, England), British singer, songwriter, guitarist, and author who became a critic’s darling and a champion of populist activism in the mid-1980s as he fused the personal and the political in songs of love and conscience.
Born into a working-class family in eastern Greater London, Bragg played briefly in a punk band (Riff Raff), then bought his way out of the British army before becoming a modern-day troubadour. Inspired by the Clash, part punk and part folksinger, he banged out songs on his electric guitar on any stage open to him. His debut album, Life’s a Riot with Spy vs. Spy, brought critical acclaim, reached the British Top 30, and yielded the hit “A New England” in 1984. A committed socialist, Bragg played a number of benefit performances during the British miners’ strike of 1984–85. (He later helped form Red Wedge, an organization and tour that supported the Labour Party.)
Adding to the spare instrumentation of his first albums, Bragg began releasing increasingly polished work, including Talking with the Taxman About Poetry (1986), featuring the Motown-inspired “Levi Stubbs’ Tears,” and Workers Playtime (1988). After the more dogmatic The Internationale (1990), his songwriting resumed its characteristic blend of simple, poetic lyrics and evocative melodies, conveyed by Bragg’s emotive Cockney-inflected voice, on Don’t Try This at Home (1991) and William Bloke (1996). More popular in Britain (where he reached number one with a cover version of the Beatles’ “She’s Leaving Home” in 1988) than in the United States, Bragg nevertheless collaborated with American alternative-rock band Wilco on Mermaid Avenue (1998), an album built on lyrics by folk music legend Woody Guthrie; Mermaid Avenue Vol. II was released in 2000. Another posthumous collaboration with Guthrie, Mermaid Vol. III, was released simultaneously in 2012 with a box set that bundled it with the first two albums, Mermaid Avenue: The Complete Sessions. Subsequent albums included England, Half English (2002) and Mr. Love & Justice (2008), which borrowed its title from a novel by Colin MacInnes, chronicler of British youth culture in the 1950s and ’60s.
As British cultural and political life both devolved to the United Kingdom’s component nations and became increasingly multicultural, Bragg became interested in the notion of English identity, one of the subjects at the centre of his book The Progressive Patriot: A Search for Belonging (2006). In 2011 he released Fight Songs, a compilation of political songs that he had posted to his Web site as free downloads over roughly the previous 10 years. Tooth & Nail, which followed in 2013, mixed mostly personal compositions with a smattering of politically infused works, all set against folk- and country-flavoured musical backdrops.
Over four days in March 2016, Bragg and American singer-songwriter Joe Henry traveled some 3,000 miles (4,800 km) by train from Chicago to Los Angeles, stopping along the way in cities such as San Antonio, Texas, and Tucson, Arizona, to record a series of country, folk, and blues standards in waiting rooms and on platforms of train stations. The resulting album, Shine a Light: Field Recordings from the Great American Railroad  (2016), featured no shortage of train songs, including Leadbelly’s “Rock Island Line.” The inclusion of that song—which served as the catalyst for the mid-1950s skiffle movement in Britain when it was recorded by Lonnie Donegan—was a harbinger of Bragg’s next big project, the writing of the book Roots, Radicals and Rockers: How Skiffle Changed the World (2017).
Inspired by pamphleteer Thomas Paine, Bragg then wrote a strictly political tract, The Three Dimensions of Freedom (2019), in which he reflected on freedom of speech in an era of growing authoritarianism and argued for the linkage of liberty, equality, and accountability. Also released in 2019 was Best of Billy Bragg at the BBC 1983–2019, a collection Bragg’s live performances for BBC radio. Bragg’s long association with the BBC dated from 1983, when the then new recording artist, having heard renowned disc jockey John Peel comment on air that he was hungry for curry, appeared at the BBC studios with a helping of Indian food and a copy of his first album, a cut from which Peel then proceeded to play on air. 
