Buffy Sainte-Marie, byname of Beverly Sainte-Marie,  (born February 20, 1941/42, Piapot Reserve, Saskatchewan, Canada), Canadian-born American singer-songwriter, guitarist, political activist, and visual artist known especially for her use of music to promote awareness of issues affecting Native Americans.
Orphaned as an infant in Canada when her mother, a Plains Cree, died in an automobile accident, Sainte-Marie was adopted by an American couple of Mi’kmaq ancestry and raised in Massachusetts and Maine. She played piano as a young child, and as a teenager she took up guitar and started composing her own songs. After completing high school, she attended the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, where she studied philosophy (with an Asian focus) and education. She received a bachelor’s degree in 1962. Sainte-Marie began performing her songs in coffeehouses during her college years, and after graduation she moved to New York City to take part in the bohemian arts scene of Greenwich Village.
Sainte-Marie’s breakthrough came in 1963, when critic Robert Shelton of The New York Times praised her as “one of the most promising new talents on the folk scene.” The review led to a contract with Vanguard Records and to the release of her first album, It’s My Way! (1964). The recording contained a number of songs that became stylistic benchmarks in the development of her musical corpus. “Now That the Buffalo’s Gone” addressed Native American land rights and intercultural relationships. The song featured Sainte-Marie’s distinctive tremolo vocal technique, which is often attributed to the influence of Native American powwow singing but which may also reflect Sainte-Marie’s acknowledged identification with the French singer Edith Piaf, whose vocal style was marked by a similar warbling quality. “Cod’ine,” which was based on Sainte-Marie’s addiction to codeine during treatment for bronchial pneumonia, conveyed a warning about the perils of substance dependency. “Cripple Creek” features Sainte-Marie singing and intermittently playing a Native American musical bow—specifically, a mouth bow, so called because it uses the mouth as a resonator; by plucking the single string of the bow, holding it to the mouth, and strategically varying the shape of the mouth cavity, different overtones are emphasized to yield a distinct melody. The mouth bow ultimately became a trademark of Sainte-Marie’s performances. Her song “Universal Soldier” arose as an anti-Vietnam War anthem not only through her own performances but also through cover recordings and performances by Scottish singer-songwriter Donovan.
Sainte-Marie’s second release, Many a Mile (1965), contained “Until It’s Time for You to Go,” a love song covered by a number of singers including, among others, Bobby Darin, Barbra Streisand, Neil Diamond, and Elvis Presley. Other important songs and albums of the 1960s included “My Country ’Tis of Thy People You’re Dying,” a poignant commentary on the exclusion of Native Americans from mainstream American history, from Little Wheel Spin and Spin (1966); and Illuminations (1969), notable for its use of electronically synthesized and manipulated instrumental and vocal sounds and for its quadraphonic recording technology. In the 1970s she contributed the title song to the film Soldier Blue (1970) and released three more albums—Buffy (1974), Changing Woman (1975), and Sweet America (1976)—before taking a break from recording that lasted some 15 years.
Although Sainte-Marie’s recording hiatus coincided with the birth of her first child, she also had declined in popularity—perhaps as a result of her political outspokenness. She championed a variety of political causes during the 1960s and ’70s, most notably the American Indian Movement—the militant civil rights organization that took over Alcatraz Island in 1969–71—and the anti-Vietnam War movement. Sainte-Marie held that her association with such movements led to her being blacklisted by the Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon administrations, which severely limited her ability to receive radio airplay and secure performance engagements.
Throughout her career Sainte-Marie was a staunch advocate of education both for and about the Native American community. In that capacity she founded the Nihewan Foundation for American Indian Education (later called the Nihewan Foundation for Native American Education) in 1969, and in 1976–81 she was a member of the cast of the children’s educational television series Sesame Street, where she sought to raise awareness of the presence and vibrancy of Native American cultures in contemporary society. In the mid-1990s she established the Cradleboard Teaching Project, which facilitated educational partnerships—typically over long distances—between Native and non-Native American communities and promoted development of culturally sensitive school curricula. Meanwhile, in the 1980s she began to create, exhibit, and teach computer-based visual art at various venues across North America.
Although Sainte-Marie did not release any new recordings between the mid-1970s and the mid-1980s, she continued to compose music. The song “Up Where We Belong” was among her most successful works of that period. Cowritten with Jack Nitzsche and Will Jennings and recorded by Joe Cocker and Jennifer Warnes for the film An Officer and a Gentleman (1982), the song reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart and won numerous awards, including an Academy Award for best original song in 1983.
In 1992 Sainte-Marie returned to recording her own music. She released the album Coincidence (and Likely Stories) (1992), which featured the pointed political commentary “Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee” as well as a new version of “Starwalker” (originally released in 1976) that incorporated samples from the Ironwood Singers, a highly regarded Northern Plains powwow drum group. She followed that album with Up Where We Belong (1996), an album that, most significantly, contained her own first recording of the award-winning title song. Sainte-Marie continued to compose and record music, produce artwork, and engage in various advocacy and educational activities in the early 21st century. In 2008 she released Running for the Drum, an album of almost entirely new songs, and her eclectic album Power in the Blood (2015) was awarded the 2015 Polaris Music Prize for best Canadian album of the year. Medicine Songs, a collection of new and reworked older songs that fit her activist vision, appeared in 2017. She later released a children’s book based on a song of the same name, Hey Little Rockabye: A Lullaby for Pet Adoption (2020).
