Cassandra Wilson,  (born December 4, 1955, Jackson, Mississippi, U.S.), American musician whose recordings combined such musical genres as jazz, rap, and hip-hop. She performed jazz standards, folk songs, Delta blues, and pop classics as well as many original numbers that defied categorization.
Wilson began writing songs in her youth after learning basic guitar chords from her jazz-guitarist father and absorbing the folk music of Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez, and Judy Collins. She graduated from Jackson (Mississippi) State University with a degree in mass communications in 1981 and moved to New York City the following year. There she joined M-Base, a cooperative organization of adventurous musicians who experimented in jazz, hip-hop, rap, and funk. She was a vocalist on several albums by M-Base members. Her first two solo albums, Point of View (1986) and Days Aweigh (1987), were heavily experimental, featuring psychedelic lyrics, electric instruments, and funk and reggae rhythms. Her third album, Blue Skies (1988), was more traditional; a collection of mostly jazz standards, it became her first popular success.
Her record company, Polygram, wanted her to record more standards, but Wilson had other ideas. Leaving Polygram for Blue Note Records, she continued writing her own songs and began reinterpreting works by such diverse artists as Mitchell, Van Morrison, Neil Young, and Delta blues legends Robert Johnson and Son House. She eschewed conventional song settings in favour of distinctive accompaniment, featuring percussion, guitar, and the occasional instrument not traditionally associated with jazz—harmonica, banjo, accordion, violin, or marimba. The results were commercial and musical successes. Her Blue Light ’til Dawn (1993) sold more than 400,000 copies. New Moon Daughter (1995) sold more than 650,000 copies and earned Wilson the 1997 Grammy Award for best jazz vocal performance. She also toured as a featured vocalist in Wynton Marsalis’s epic cantata about slavery, Blood on the Fields, in 1997.
Two years later Wilson released the album Traveling Miles, a tribute to jazz great Miles Davis. For the album she wrote six new songs inspired by his work and invented lyrics to three of his originals. Wilson’s later albums included Belly of the Sun (2002); Thunderbird (2006); Loverly (2008), which won the Grammy for best jazz vocal album; Closer to You: The Pop Side (2009); and Coming Forth by Day (2015).
