Gagaku,  ancient court music of Japan. The name is a Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese characters for elegant music (yayue). Most gagaku music is of foreign origin, imported largely from China and Korea as early as the 6th century and established as a court tradition by the 8th century.
The various forms of North Asian, Chinese, Indian, and Southeast Asian, as well as indigenous Japanese, music were organized in the 9th century into two major categories: tōgaku, the so-called music of the left, which included Tang-dynasty (618–907) Chinese music as well as Indian materials; and komagaku, the music of the right, which contained Korean music and all other forms. The flute and the main drum of tōgaku and komagaku differ, and komagaku does not use strings. Instrumental performances of gagaku without dance are called kangen (flutes and strings), whereas dances and their accompaniment are called bugaku.
The categories of gagaku music have varied over time as Japanese foreign relations have shifted and as new repertoires have been incorporated into the tradition. In the early 21st century, gagaku music could be grouped into three principal categories: indigenous Japanese songs and dances, including various forms of Shintō ritual or ancient vocal music; foreign music, primarily tōgaku and komagaku; and vocal forms of mixed local and foreign origin, such as saibara pastoral songs and rōei recitations. Tōgaku is the dominant repertoire, a status it has maintained since the mid-8th century.
The solo music for the instruments of gagaku has been lost, although some notations survive. The mnemonic nature of the notation and the rote methods of teaching the music make it difficult to reconstruct such lost traditions as well as to evaluate the present performance practice of existing ensemble music. Nevertheless, the very continuance of such ancient forms through all the vicissitudes of history gives extremely rare living insights into the probable nature of music and cultural life in East Asia more than 1,000 years ago. Gagaku and its Korean counterpart, a-ak, not only provide information about traditional national musical forms but also are the major sources for clues concerning the musical practices of Tang-dynasty China.
