Korean music,  the art concerned with combining vocal or instrumental sounds for beauty of form or emotional expression, specifically as it is carried out in Korea, or the Korean peninsula, where a strong indigenous tradition has been influenced by the Chinese and the Mongols.
On a map the Korean peninsula, which comprises the countries of North Korea and South Korea, looks like a finger pointing from the top of China down to the lower part of Japan. Thus, one would expect its music to reflect its “bridge” position between two such powerful traditions. The movements of foreign, particularly Chinese, armies and cultures are indeed major factors in Korea’s tradition. But beneath these reflections lies a deeper core of indigenous musical styles that, at first hearing, seem most strange to the ear of listeners with preconceived notions as to what East Asian music sounds like. A possible additional factor in the growth of Korean music is the region’s position as a peninsula jutting out from Manchuria and from the native ground of many Mongolian hordes. Archaeological sources indicate that various Mongol peoples from northern Asia did indeed occupy areas of Korea from at least 2000 bce, and Chinese writings show that their people and armies were active in Korea from the period of the Chinese Han dynasty (206 bce–220 ce) on. Obviously, a study of Korean music contains riches extending far beyond its geographic borders.
The earliest references to music in Korea are found in a 3rd-century-ce Chinese text that comments on agricultural festivals (nong’ak) with singing and dancing among the tribes of northwestern Korea. Such events are still a strong part of Korean life. Another ancient but long-lived tradition in Korea is shamanism, or communication with the unseen world by a shaman in a state of trance. This is of special interest because such a belief is historically characteristic not only of all northern Asian tribes but also of other peoples (such as Eskimos [Inuit]) who live in the northernmost regions of the world. Korea is one of the few regions south of the Arctic that maintains strong shamanism in the face of foreign religious adoptions such as Buddhism, Confucianism, and Christianity.
A female Korean shaman (mudang) may use many combinations of musical instruments. The simplest and potentially most significant accompaniment is a small, flat gong with a slight rim. It brings to mind the single-headed pan drum with a wooden or bone hoop found in the shamanism of most of Central Asia and in the Arctic Circle as far away as Lapland and Hudson Bay. A drum sound itself is produced in Korea by the most popular percussion instrument, the changgo, an hourglass-shaped, two-headed drum struck by the hand on the left head and a stick or a ball-headed beater on the other. In Korean shaman rituals, flutes, double reeds, fiddles, and other gongs and drums may be used that at first sight may appear rather Chinese. The sound, however, creates a totally different impression.
To the uninitiated listener, the driving polyphony (combination of simultaneous voices, or parts) of Korean music might seem closer to Dixieland jazz than to Chinese music. For example, the flute part in a small shaman ensemble may employ such devices as microtonal slides (shifts in pitch that are less than a semitone, or half step), intervals that are “out of tune” with the ancient Chinese lü (bamboo) tuning pipes, and syncopated rhythms, which together yield a very un-Chinese jazzlike sound. Korean music also exhibits a tendency toward a six-beat metric unit as well as a kind of polymetric character; while some parts are organized in six-beat units, others might seem to follow beats of four, so all parts come together only after 12 beats. Triplets and even five-beat forms are found as well. These stylistic features are indeed unique to Korea and are typical of the kind of music best known and loved by the general Korean populace. Less-familiar styles of court music are maintained by dedicated national music institutes and Korean scholarship.
