Middle Eastern music,  music of the Arabic-, Turkish-, and Persian-speaking world. Despite three major languages and associated cultural differences, the music can be seen as a single great tradition because of the unifying element of Islam. The fact that Islam has historically found music problematic has resulted in relatively little religious ceremonial music, but it has not held back secular music and has even enriched it with a strong religious strain. Only those following certain practices, such as Sufism, have used music (and dance) for worship; within the mosque, however, activities resembling music (but which are not considered music per se) generally have been limited to the call to prayer (adhān) and the chanting of the Qurʾān.
Folk music and art music differ less in the Middle East than elsewhere, especially because folk music, like art music, has long been the province of professionals (including many women), and the two traditions are based largely on similar principles. Both tend to feature soloists, either alone or accompanied by a small group. Rhythmic treatment also is similar, being closely related to principles of prosody but also employing rhythmic modes called īqāʿāt in Arabic. Both types of music also include characteristic nonmetric improvisations. The melodic and tonal construction of performances, which is based on a system of modes called maqām in Arabic, also is the same in folk and art-music traditions.
A typical performance consists of alternating sections of composed and improvised material, the composed portions being accompanied by percussion instruments beating one of a number of standard patterns that articulate the rhythmic mode. Melodic instruments—such as the nāy (flute), zornā (double-reed instrument), ʿūd (short-necked lute), and sanṭūr (trapezoidal zither)—play in unison with the solo line during the composed parts and echo it one or two beats behind in the improvised parts. Especially after 1950, the rise of Western-influenced commercial popular music affected Middle Eastern art music, which now employs less improvisation and more strict unison between parts, in shorter pieces. The Middle East has been an important source of musical instruments for other parts of the world. Bagpipes, guitar, lute, oboe, tambourine, viols, and most zithers have a Middle Eastern origin.
