Nueva canción, (Spanish: “new song”) in Cuba called nueva trova,  a genre of pan-Latin American popular music, best known for propelling a powerful populist political movement—especially in Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Cuba—during the 1960s and ’70s. The music’s instrumentation, rhythmic character, melodic structure, and textual form and content have been inspired largely by the region’s rural traditions.
Nueva canción embraces a broad spectrum of musical styles that have been consciously crafted as an emblem of the socially, economically, and politically marginalized peoples of Latin America and their struggle for social justice. The guitar, an instrument that has long been associated with folk music throughout Latin America, is central to the tradition. It is usually joined in performance by a number of indigenous—especially Andean—instruments, such as zampoñas (panpipes), quenas (end-blown flutes), and the charango, a distinctive plucked lute with a rounded back traditionally made from the shell of an armadillo. Rhythmically, nueva canción draws much of its material from regional dance forms such as the cueca of Argentina and Chile and the huayño of Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Melodies are often based on a pentatonic (five-pitch) scale, in the manner of much regional Latin American music, and they frequently oscillate between major and minor modes, which is characteristic of many Andean musical traditions.
Nueva canción texts, often set in traditional Hispanic poetic forms such as the 10-line décima, are usually dense with metaphor and replete with imagery drawn from rural life and lore. With some notable exceptions, the words to most songs are not blatantly political. Nevertheless, they clearly cultivate social awareness, promote a sense of social responsibility, and, ultimately, rally their audiences against the sources of social inequity.
Some performers of nueva cancíon don the traditional clothing of rural minority groups (with whom they may have no direct affiliation) to intensify the impact of their message. Beginning in the late 20th century, many artists became increasingly rock-oriented, both in their sound and in their professional image, and the trend persisted well into the early 21st century. Such a stylistic shift, however, has not changed the aim of these musicians, as they have remained musically committed to social reform.
The roots of nueva canción trace to the late 1950s and early ’60s, a notably restive era in Latin American history. Many countries were saddled with ineffective or authoritarian governments, and the gap between the wealthy and the impoverished was widening. Moreover, European and North American cultural influence was becoming increasingly palpable, with musical tastes in particular molded to a significant degree by the commercial-music industry of North America. In that milieu two notable singer-songwriters in neighbouring countries embarked on crusades to reclaim what they perceived as the crumbling social and cultural integrity of their homelands: Violeta Parra in Chile and Atahualpa Yupanqui in Argentina.
Much of the work of Parra and Yupanqui involved collecting old songs from the countryside and reworking—or rejuvenating—them to become “new songs” in a more contemporary, broadly accessible format. Parra commonly cast her song in well-established local poetic forms, and, perhaps most significant, she introduced Andean instruments into the accompanying ensemble. Meanwhile, Yupanqui’s semisung lyrics, intoned atop expressive guitar playing, vividly evoked the hardships of life in the Andes. By developing and promoting a body of popular songs that were grounded in local traditions and that addressed the experiences and concerns of ordinary people, both Parra and Yupanqui helped democratize music in their countries; their songs spoke both to and for the populace.
By the early 1960s Yupanqui’s and Parra’s music had come to be known as nueva canción, and the genre had developed an especially strong following in Chile. In 1965–67 Parra operated a peña, or “folkloric tavern,” in Santiago, where she and other musicians cultivated the new music. Most notable among the peña musicians was Victor Jara, who, with his unabashed musical criticism of the Chilean government and his magnetic power to pull people together, emerged as the primary force behind the spread of nueva canción throughout Latin America. Following Parra’s lead, Jara further enriched the sound, the message, and the appeal of nueva canción, in part by using a broader array of regional instruments from across South America. Also, while Parra was running her peña, two influential nueva canción groups arose on the college circuit in Chile. Those were Quilapayún (Mapuche language: “Three Beards”), formed in 1965 and for several years associated with Jara, and Inti-Illimani (Aymara language: “Sun of the Illimani [a mountain in the Andes]”), formed in 1967. Both groups projected a strongly Andean image.
As nueva cancíon developed in Chile, parallel traditions emerged in other countries of Latin America. In Uruguay nueva cancíon musician Daniel Viglietti created songs that captured audiences not only across Latin America but also in France and Spain. In Cuba, Pablo Milanés, Silvio Rodríguez, and their colleagues at the national film institute pioneered the “protest music” that ultimately came to be called nueva trova (also meaning “new song”). Like their continental counterparts, nueva trova singers consciously used traditional poetic structures, local instruments, and distinctively Latin American musical idioms as symbols of their resistance. In the Cuban context, however, the resistance was not against the government but against the cultural and economic influence of North America and Europe. Most nueva trova, then, was disseminated through live performance, as its musicians avoided any significant involvement with what they perceived to be the highly manipulative music industry, dominated by North America.
Nueva canción had solidified not only as a musical genre but also as a political movement by the late 1960s. Two monumental song festivals attested to the popularity and the power of the music. The first of these, the International Protest Song Meeting (Encuentra Internacional de la Canción Protesta), held in Havana in 1967, drew participants from more than 15 countries and led to the Cuban government’s establishment of a Protest Song Centre (Centro de la Canción Protesta) at the House of the Americas (Casa de las Américas), also in Havana. In 1969 a similar event took place in Santiago, drawing many Chilean musicians who, through their music, supported the cause of the leftist Popular Unity party and its candidate for president, Salvador Allende, who won the election the following year.
