Oceanic music and dance,  the music and dance traditions of the indigenous people of Oceania, in particular of Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Music and dance in Polynesia and Micronesia are audible and visual extensions of poetry, whereas in Melanesia they are aimed more at spectacular display during times of life crises and as a part of secret-society rituals. The arts of music and dance are often intertwined in these cultures, and so they are presented together in this discussion.
The nature of Melanesian music and dance reflects the “Big Man” sociopolitical structure found in many parts of the region. The leader, or Big Man, in many Melanesian societies is often a self-made man; he becomes a leader by creating followers, succeeding because he possesses skills that command respect in his society, such as oratory talent, bravery, gardening prowess, and magical powers. He amasses goods and has great public giveaways, often in connection with the erection of a Big Man’s dwelling or a men’s house, the purchase of higher grades of rank in secret societies, the sponsorship of funeral or other religious ceremonies, or the installation and consecration of slit gongs (or slit drums, percussion instruments made from hollowed-out logs or living tree trunks). These ceremonies occasion spectacular performances of music and dance as well as extraordinary displays of visual art. (See also art and architecture, Oceanic.)
There are basically two kinds of dance in Melanesian ceremonies: dances of impersonation and dances of participation. In the first type, the dancer impersonates mythical or ancestral beings; the dancer-actor becomes someone else, and his attire is usually distinctly unhuman or supernatural—consisting often of huge masks and a full otherworldly costume. The dance movements are dictated by the two considerations that the impersonated beings are not human and that the dancer’s attire makes movement difficult. Thus, the dancer’s movements are restricted to legs and swaying bodies; the dancer’s arms are often covered and frequently used to steady the costume and mask or to hold a drum that is used to accompany the dance. The movements do not interpret recited poetry; however, the accompanying sounds of musical instruments may represent the voices of the supernatural beings.
The second type of dance, that of participation, is often an extension of these dramatic ceremonies, as individuals who do not impersonate spirits often join in and dance with them, imitating the steps of the supernatural. In dances celebrating head-hunting, warfare, funeral rites, or fertility—in which the entire community sometimes participates—the same movements are used, often to the accompaniment of drumming and communal singing. The dances have a character of spontaneity and do not require long and arduous training. Their aim is not the simultaneous flawless execution of music and intricate movements but, rather, the creation of a mass rhythmic environment that might be characterized as a visual extension of rhythm. If words are associated, they are repetitious and seem not to tell a story; they may even be unintelligible. Although the specific structure of any single dance tradition in Melanesia is not yet known, it seems probable that the isolated units of movement would be primarily those of legs and body.
The entirely different world of Polynesian music and dance stands in contrast. Polynesian dance is a visual extension of poetry that uses chant or heightened speech as a vehicle for the praise and honour of high-ranking chiefs or visitors. In Polynesia, power resides in chiefly office, and traditional oral texts tell of a chief’s deeds and his descent from the gods. Genealogical rank is a distinctive feature of Polynesian societies, and music and dance pay allegiance to the rank-based sociopolitical structure, reflecting and validating the system of social distinctions and interpersonal relationships. In these societies, where power resides in the office and the regime is long and enduring, specialists compose poetry, add music and movement, and rehearse the performers for many months before a public ceremony. Movements are primarily those of hands and arms, and interpretation is that of a storyteller. The dancers do not become characters in a drama, and their stylized gestures do not correspond to words or ideas as they do in literature-inspired dance traditions of Indonesia and Southeast Asia. In Polynesia the dancer interprets a story orally, usually chanting or reciting metred poetry, and accompanies the words with actions. Although Polynesian dance texts are based on traditional stories, legends, or myths, a story is not “told” in the usual sense: traditional literature is referred to in a roundabout way, but the poetry is often the vehicle for saying something else, usually something relevant to the occasion at which it is presented. In addition, the order of the dances and the choice and placement of the dancers often supply further information about the social structure.
The structure is known for at least three Polynesian dance traditions—Tongan, Tahitian, and Hawaiian—and the basic units of movement are primarily those of the arms. The only Polynesian dance tradition, however, that has been thoroughly studied is the Tongan. Tongan dance is a visual extension of poetry and is closely intertwined with social organization. This sung poetry is a series of references to mythology, chiefly genealogies, famous scenic places, and contemporary events. The dances, which are performed either standing or sitting, interpret selected words of the text with hand and arm movements. The distinguishing characteristics of Tongan dance are the emphasis on the rotation of the lower arm and the flexion and extension of the wrist, as well as a quick sideward tilt of the head. The legs are used mainly to keep time with sideward stepping movements, and there is a marked absence of hip or torso movement. In pre-European times an important dance was the me’etu’upaki—a paddle dance performed by a large group of men in accompaniment to singing and a slit gong, which was often played by a high-ranking chief. This dance is still performed today. Group dances called me’elaufola were performed by men or women separately in accompaniment to singing, long bamboo stamping tubes, and percussion sticks. An evolved form of this dance, which flourishes today, the lakalaka, is performed by men and women together in accompaniment to sung poetry only. Solo and small group dances performed by one, four, or eight women often follow the large group dances and are more concerned with beautiful movements than with interpretation of poetry, although the same movements are used. In the 20th century, Polynesian dances can be classified into six genres, three of which have survived from pre-European times. The most acculturated dance type, the tau’olunga, is a combination of Tongan and Samoan movements accompanied by Western-style singing in conjunction with stringed instruments.
