P’ansori, sometimes called Korean folk opera,  a genre of narrative song of Korea, typically performed dramatically by a vocalist, accompanied by a puk (double-headed barrel drum). Built from the word p’an, meaning “open space,” and sori, meaning “singing” or “sound,” the term p’ansori itself is a reference to the markets, public squares, and other such open venues where performances originally took place.
With a fan in hand, a p’ansori singer uses a combination of ch’ang (song), sasŏl (narration), and pallim (dramatic gesture) to tell a story. Meanwhile, the drummer provides the appropriate rhythmic setting for each song. A considerable amount of improvised interaction occurs between the drummer and the vocalist throughout the performance.
Only 5 of an original 12 madang, or song cycles, are still performed in the 21st century. These madang address a variety of topics. The Ch’unhyangga (“The Song of Ch’unhyang”) cycle is a tale of love between an upper-class man and the lower-class daughter of a kisaeng (female entertainer), while the Simch’ŏngga (“The Song of Sim Ch’ŏng”) cycle is the story of a woman who sacrifices herself in order to help her blind father regain his eyesight. The satirical and witty madang Sugungga (“The Song of the Underwater Palace”) recounts the exploits of a hare in a sea kingdom. In a more serious vein, the Hŭngboga (“The Song of Hŭngbo”) cycle concerns a brotherhood struggle between good and evil, and Chŏkbyŏkga (“The Song of the Red Cliff”)—a madang based on the 14th-century Chinese novel Sanguozhi yanyi (Romance of the Three Kingdoms), attributed to Luo Guanzhong—depicts the famous battle of Chŏkbyŏk (or Chibi [“Red Cliff”]) during the Chinese Three Kingdoms period (220–280 ce).
The performance style of the current five song cycles has changed significantly since the advent of the genre, as p’ansori singers have adapted the repertoire, both to suit their own singing styles and to satisfy audience expectations. Singers tend to enhance the most popular segments of the cycle while radically reducing the less-engaging passages. Moreover, they rarely perform any one p’ansori cycle in its entirety—a feat that would likely span 8 to 10 hours. Rather, singers typically select only certain episodes, often using them to create new sections or variations, called tŏnŭm. While these tŏnŭm inevitably contain textual adaptations, they also often incorporate changes to the rhythmic and melodic framework, which may alter the mood of the cycle (or cycle segment) as a whole. Historically, some tŏnŭm developed identities of their own and separated from their original song cycles and, ultimately, gave birth not only to new p’ansori repertoires but also to new genres in other areas of the literary and performing arts. For example, writers began to compose novels that were specially suited for delivery through the p’ansori medium. Innovative p’ansori songs became independent music, and the dramatic element of p’ansori spawned a new, more extensively theatrical genre called ch’anggŭk.
The term cho (or jo) generally refers to the melodic framework—the mode or melody type—of a p’ansori performance (although the term also may be used to describe other aspects of singing). Most of the p’ansori repertoire is cast in one of three principal melodic modes: kyemyŏnjo, ujo, or p’yŏngjo. All these modes use an anhemitonic pentatonic scale (i.e., a five-pitch scale without semitones—e.g., e-g-a-c-d-e), with a distinctive contour and central (fundamental) pitch. Within each mode, each pitch has a unique character, which is reinforced through frequency of use as well as through conventions of ornamentation and approach. The modes also carry emotional associations that ultimately help to reinforce the potency of the narrative. Kyemyŏnjo radiates a feeling of pathos, ujo creates an atmosphere of magnificence and vigour, and p’yŏngjo embodies a sense of serenity.
The various metric frameworks of p’ansori are called changdan. Each changdan is distinguished by the number and subdivision of beats within a metric unit, by the pattern of accents, and by general tempo specifications. Like the melodic modes, the metres employed in p’ansori are evocative of particular emotional states. Some changdan, for instance, project a mood of lamentation, while others depict enjoyment, agony, or suspense. The appearance of certain characters—such as mythical creatures—in the story’s plot also is accompanied by specific changdan. Different metres also mark narrative or lyrical passages, as well as the explanatory remarks that conclude a performance.
The pitch range of p’ansori usually spans some two and a half octaves. In the lower and middle ranges, singers use a husky vocal quality, called surisŏng, produced by tensing the vocal cords while pushing the diaphragm upward. Because it is difficult to maintain this quality in the upper registers, performers typically employ falsetto techniques to reach and project the higher pitches. Certain vocal qualities, most notably a nasal tone and excessive vibrato, are considered unattractive in the p’ansori tradition. Similarly, extreme clarity of sound—which is perceived as superficial—and an overly harsh tone are avoided.
The term che (or je) refers broadly to the regional styles or schools of p’ansori that have developed over the course of the tradition’s history, owing largely to the creativity of a handful of renowned 19th-century performers. These styles generally can be grouped into three categories: tongp’yŏnje (“east-side singing school”), sŏp’yŏnje (“west-side singing school”), and chunggoje (“middle-high singing school”). Tongp’yŏnje is associated with the eastern Chŏlla region (in southwestern South Korea) and particularly with the singers Song Hŭngnok, Chong Ch’unp’ung, and Kim Sejong. Hallmarks of the style include a deep controlled voice that is projected directly from the abdomen, an emphasis on the vigorous ujo melodic mode, a straightforward rhythmic character, and a specialization in the Hŭngboga, Sugungga, and Chŏkbyŏkga song cycles. Sŏp’yŏnje refers to a style from the western part of the Chŏlla region that was created and propagated in the late 19th century by the singer Park Yujŏn. It is highly ornamented (both melodically and rhythmically), focuses on the sorrowful kyemyŏn melodic mode, and concentrates on the Ch’unhyangga and Simch’ŏngga song cycles. Chunggoje was pioneered in the late 19th century by the performer Kim Sŏngok in the Ch’ungch’ŏng region, to the north of Chŏlla; this school of p’ansori had virtually disappeared by the early 20th century.
