Thomas Mapfumo,  (born 1945, Marondera, Southern Rhodesia [now in Zimbabwe]), Zimbabwean musician and composer who propelled Zimbabwe toward independence in the 1970s through his cultivation of chimurenga—a local genre of politically charged popular music. Mapfumo also was instrumental in introducing the West to the traditional music of Zimbabwe through his involvement in the world music movement.
When he was still a child, Mapfumo moved from Marondera to Salisbury (now Harare), where he began his musical career at age 16 with a band called the Cyclones. His early career with such bands as the Springfields and the Cosmic Dots featured little more than a few cover versions of Elvis Presley and Otis Redding tunes. During the early 1970s, however, when many black Zimbabweans were beginning to resist the white minority government, Mapfumo was also effecting a revolution in popular music by writing the lyrics to his songs in the language of the Shona people, who constitute the majority of black Zimbabweans, and by incorporating traditional melodies and rhythms into his music.
One of the key inspirations of Mapfumo’s work was the music of the mbira, an African lamellaphone consisting of a large gourd resonator fitted with a set of metal keys that are plucked with the thumbs. Mapfumo and his guitarist worked together to duplicate on the electric guitar the sounds and rhythms of the mbira. The intensely complicated rhythms played on the drums were meant to represent the stamping of dancers’ feet. In 1976 Mapfumo formed the Acid Band, which produced a blend of popular and traditional music as a vehicle to carry thinly veiled political messages; that music was called chimurenga (Shona: “struggle”). The band’s first album, released in 1977, was titled Hokoyo! (“Watch Out!”).
The white minority government saw Mapfumo’s music as a threat and banned it from the state-controlled radio stations. His music was still heard, however, in discos and on radio broadcasts that originated in neighbouring countries. In late 1977, with the escalation of guerrilla warfare, security forces finally attempted to silence Mapfumo by imprisoning him for 90 days. Upon his release he returned to writing his chimurenga songs, which had come to be identified with the fight for freedom. In 1978 he founded the band with which he would continue to perform (albeit with changes in personnel) into the 21st century, the Blacks Unlimited. When Zimbabwe won independence in 1980, Mapfumo was considered to have played no small part in the achievement. During the 1980s he added a real mbira to the band and continued to nurture and promote the traditional music of Zimbabwe.
Even after independence, Mapfumo’s music maintained a sociopolitical edge. As he lost faith in Pres. Robert Mugabe in the later 20th century, the government increasingly became the target of his criticism, and, following the release of Corruption (1989) with the Blacks Unlimited, Mapfumo and the members of his band were subject to harassment by the administration. In his 1993 album, Hondo (“War”), Mapfumo’s Shona lyrics still spoke of struggle—against war, the AIDS epidemic in Africa, and the loss of traditional culture. By the mid-1990s Mapfumo had become firmly established in the increasingly popular realm of world music and had garnered more international recognition for the sounds of his country than any other Zimbabwean musician to date.
Viewed in his own country not only as a brilliant musician but also as an important revolutionary and powerful advocate of social justice, Mapfumo indeed found himself in continual conflict with the government. This political friction eventually led him in 2000 to move to the United States, where he settled in Oregon. Mapfumo’s relocation did not diminish the potency of his recordings in his homeland, however; his 2005 album, Rise Up, like many of his earlier works, was banned from the state radio stations of Zimbabwe. Exile (2010) and Danger Zone (2015) were equally politically pointed. Following Mugabe’s 2017 resignation, Mapfumo returned to Zimbabwe for the first time since 2004 to perform in concert in Harare, on April 28, 2018, before an audience of thousands.
