Boy Scouts of America v. Dale,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (5–4) on June 28, 2000, that the Boy Scouts, a U.S. organization for boys, may exclude gay scoutmasters.
The case originated when James Dale, an assistant scoutmaster in the Boy Scouts of America, was expelled from the organization when it learned that he was gay and active in the gay rights movement.  In 1999 Dale filed suit in New Jersey Superior Court and successfully argued that his dismissal had violated a New Jersey civil rights law that prohibited any “public accommodation” from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation. The Boy Scouts, in turn, pointed to their own policy statements depicting homosexual conduct as inconsistent with the requirement that a Scout be “morally straight” and “clean.” In other states the organization, facing similar suits, had argued that it was a private club and not a public accommodation and that, as such, it enjoyed a First Amendment freedom of association to include or exclude whomever it pleased.
After losing in state court, the Boy Scouts appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments on April 26, 2000. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice William Rehnquist acknowledged that the government could override a group’s associational rights in order to promote a compelling state interest but held that courts should defer to a private group’s view of what might interfere with its constitutionally protected expression. “Dale’s presence in the Boy Scouts would, at the very least, force the organization to send a message…that the Boy Scouts accept homosexual conduct as a legitimate form of behavior,” he concluded. Rehnquist’s opinion was joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Sandra Day O’Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas.
The two dissenting opinions, by Justices John Paul Stevens and David Souter—both of whom had joined the majority in Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc. (1995), which upheld the right of parade organizers to exclude gay groups—did not disagree so much with Rehnquist’s interpretation of the law as with the facts of the case. Quoting from the Scouts’ handbook, Stevens declared that “it is plain as the light of day that neither one of these principles—‘morally straight’ and ‘clean’—says the slightest thing about homosexuality.” Since the Scouts had not clearly proclaimed any antigay policy in its official handbook, Stevens argued, the Hurley decision was not controlling. Moreover, Dale did not flout his sexual orientation, and no evidence existed that he wanted to use his position as scoutmaster to send any kind of message regarding homosexuality to members of the Boy Scouts or to the world. Stevens’s opinion was joined by Souter and by Justices Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Souter’s dissent was also joined by Breyer and Ginsburg.
