Chelsea Manning, original name Bradley Edward Manning,  (born December 17, 1987, Crescent, Oklahoma, U.S.), U.S. Army intelligence analyst who provided the Web site WikiLeaks with hundreds of thousands of classified documents in what was believed to be the largest unauthorized release of state secrets in U.S. history.
Manning was a precocious child, demonstrating an aptitude for computers and excelling in academics. Manning was raised as a boy, and, as a young teenager, he told his mother and close friends that he was gay. Manning’s parents divorced in 2000. As relations soured with Manning’s father, the teen and his mother moved to Wales. In 2005 Manning returned to the United States to live with Manning’s father in Oklahoma City and worked at a software company. Manning displayed talent as a programmer but also behaviour that was becoming increasingly detached, and coworkers found it difficult to communicate with Manning. Manning was eventually fired from the job and kicked out of Manning’s father’s home. Manning drifted across the country, settling with a relative in Maryland before joining the army in 2007.
Manning finished basic training in April 2008 and then attended intelligence school at Fort Huachuca in Arizona. Manning received a top-secret security clearance and, upon graduating from the course in August 2008, was assigned to the 2nd Brigade, 10th Mountain Division at Fort Drum in New York. Although aware of the constraints of the military’s “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” (DADT) policy, Manning was open about sexuality, discussing DADT with local media and posting about a relationship on Facebook. Manning deployed to Iraq in October 2009 and was stationed at a forward operating base east of Baghdad and was privy to a wealth of top-secret documents. It was alleged that the following month Manning contacted WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange with the intention of releasing classified information to the public.
In February 2010 WikiLeaks posted a classified diplomatic cable that had been dispatched by the U.S. embassy in Reykjavík, Iceland. It marked the beginning of a flood of classified documents, including the April 2010 release of a video that showed a U.S. helicopter crew firing on a group of people that included two Reuters employees. About that time, Manning’s job performance became erratic, and Manning was demoted pending an early discharge. Manning contacted former hacker Adrian Lamo in May 2010, and the two began an online correspondence. Manning told Lamo of having downloaded hundreds of thousands of documents from secure government computers and forwarding them to WikiLeaks. Within days Lamo notified the army, and Manning was arrested later that month. Manning was confined pending trial by court-martial and ultimately was charged with more than two dozen offenses, including the capital offense of aiding the enemy.
Beginning in July 2010, Manning was held for nine months at a U.S. Marine Corps brig in Quantico, Virginia. During that time, Manning was subjected to treatment that was ruled to be excessively harsh, and Manning was awarded a small sentence reduction as compensation. After more than 1,000 days of pretrial incarceration, in February 2013 Manning pleaded guilty to 10 of the lesser counts that were pending. Although those charges carried a potential maximum sentence of 20 years in prison, military prosecutors chose to continue with the court-martial and pursue the additional charges against Manning. In July 2013 Manning was found not guilty of the most serious of those offenses—aiding the enemy—but was convicted of numerous other counts, including espionage and theft. The following month Manning was sentenced to 35 years in prison.
The day after the sentence was announced, Manning said in a statement that “I am a female” and asked to be referred to as Chelsea Manning. While imprisoned, Manning sought treatment for gender dysphoria, but the Department of Defense refused the request, and in 2014 the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit on her behalf. In 2016 Manning staged a hunger strike, and, after 10 days, army officials agreed to allow her to pursue treatment, including gender reassignment surgery. In January 2017 U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, as one of his final acts in office, commuted the bulk of Manning’s remaining sentence, and she was released from prison on May 17, 2017. In January 2018 Manning announced that she was seeking the Democratic nomination for the U.S. Senate in Maryland. However, she lost in the primary.
In February 2019 Manning publicly disclosed that she had received a subpoena to testify before a grand jury. Although granted immunity, she refused to answer questions about WikiLeaks, and in March she was jailed for contempt of court. Manning was released upon the expiration of the grand jury’s term in May 2019, but she was served with another subpoena while she was still in custody. This raised the possibility of a second contempt finding, and Manning was, in fact, returned to jail just a week later. She remained incarcerated until March 2020, when Manning’s attorneys reported that she had attempted suicide. Manning was transferred to a hospital, and a judge ruled that she was no longer required to testify.
