Daughters of Bilitis (DOB),  one of the first lesbian organizations to be established. Founded in San Francisco in 1955, the organization took its name from a collection of poems written by Pierre Louÿs called Songs of Bilitis. Bilitis was a female character who was romantically associated with Sappho, the female Greek lyric poet.
When DOB was established, there were few opportunities for lesbians to meet, and lesbians were subject to discrimination and public hostility. The organization began as a small, secret social club for lesbians, starting with just eight members. Among the founding members of DOB were Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon, who would become well-known lesbian rights activists. During the late 1950s other DOB chapters were founded across America and in Australia too, although membership numbers remained relatively small.
Early in the development of DOB, its role and membership criteria came under scrutiny by its members. Conflicting views led some of the original founding members to leave DOB. Those changes contributed to redefining DOB as a political organization focused on lesbian rights, rather than as a purely social organization. That was a radical development, given the social stigma of homosexuality at the time.
In October 1956 DOB published the first issue of The Ladder, edited by Lyon, initially under the pen name Ann Ferguson. The Ladder is usually regarded as the first lesbian serial in America, although a short-lived publication titled Vice Versa had existed in the late 1940s. The Ladder ceased publication in 1972, following the 1970 secret takeover of the magazine by its editor, Barbara Grier, and the DOB national president at the time, Rita LaPorte, both of whom favoured a stronger lesbian feminist stance than that which the DOB generally advocated. That event reflected one of the core tensions that surrounded DOB: whether it should align itself with male-dominated gay rights groups, such as its ally the Mattachine Society, or whether it should identify itself with lesbian separatist feminists. Those conflicting perspectives led to DOB’s dissolution of its national organization in the 1970s, although local chapters persisted after that for several years.
Although it was plagued by tensions that reflected the difficult and politically loaded social climate, DOB is credited with numerous achievements. Socially, DOB facilitated one of the first opportunities for lesbians to meet and share their everyday struggles. Politically, DOB began the long quest to achieve visibility and acceptance for lesbians and to place lesbian rights on the civil rights agenda.
