Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), byname of U.S. Public Law 104-199.,  law in force from 1996 to 2013 that specifically denied to same-sex couples all benefits and recognition given to opposite-sex couples. Those benefits included more than 1,000 federal protections and privileges, such as the legal recognition of relationships, access to a partner’s employment benefits, rights of inheritance, joint tax returns and tax exemptions, immigration or residency for noncitizen partners, next-of-kin status, protection from domestic violence, and the right to live together in military or college housing.
DOMA mandated that states banning same-sex marriage were not required to recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states and further elucidated that, for the purposes of federal law, marriage could occur only between a man and a woman. The act was introduced with overwhelming support in Congress amid speculation that the state of Hawaii would soon legalize same-sex marriage, thereby forcing other states to recognize same-sex marriages that had taken place in Hawaii. President Bill Clinton signed DOMA into law on September 21, 1996. After that time some 40 states enacted explicit bans on same-sex marriage in either state laws or state constitutions.
Under DOMA a nonbiological parent in a same-sex couple was unable to establish a legal relationship with the child or children of the biological parent; same-sex partners were unable to take family medical leave to care for such nonbiological children or for their partners, to adopt children, or to petition the court for child support, visitation, or custody if the relationship ended.
Proponents of DOMA viewed opposite-sex marriage as the only appropriate context for procreation and family formation. According to DOMA supporters, same-sex marriage validated alternative family formations, destabilized opposite-sex marriage and monogamy, and encouraged incestuous relationships and polygamous marriage. Opponents argued that such narrow definitions of marriage and family devalued all other types of relationships and families, discriminated on the basis of sex, and conflated homosexuality with incest and polygamy.
DOMA’s definition of marriage as a legal union between one man and one woman was struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court in United States v. Windsor (2013). The provision of the law that had permitted states to refuse to recognize same-sex marriages performed in other jurisdictions was invalidated by the court in Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), which granted to same-sex couples a constitutional right to marry.
