Gordon B. Hinckley,  (born June 23, 1910, Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S.—died Jan. 27, 2008, Salt Lake City), 15th president (1995–2008) of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly known as the Mormon church. Hinckley helped to expand the church from some 9 million to nearly 13 million members worldwide and led it from the margins to the mainstream of American society.
Hinckley was descended from pilgrims who sailed on the Mayflower and from Mormon pioneers who moved from Illinois to Utah in the 19th century. He earned a degree in English from the University of Utah in 1932. From 1933 to 1935 he preached publicly in London’s Hyde Park, thereby completing the two-year missionary service that young Mormons are encouraged to perform. Hinckley’s activities in England so impressed church leaders that upon his return to Utah he was put in charge of the church’s newly created public relations service. During the next 20 years he produced a radio series on church history, supervised church exhibits at the 1938 World’s Fair in San Francisco and the centennial celebration of the California gold rush in 1949, and helped to create a network of church-owned radio and television stations. As head of the church’s General Missionary Committee from 1951 until 1958, he continued to embrace the media, appearing on radio and television news programs and granting interviews with every major American newspaper.
In 1961 Hinckley became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the second highest governing body of the church. As an apostle Hinckley was sent on global missions, evangelizing in Africa, South America, and Asia. In 1981 he was appointed a counselor of the First Presidency—an office consisting of the president and usually two counselors. Because of the poor health of the other members of the presidency, he eventually assumed most of the responsibilities of running the church. He was ordained president on March 12, 1995.
As president, Hinckley led a profound transformation of the church from a small group based largely in the American West to a respected world religion. His global travels took the message of the church to people around the world and stimulated significant growth in church membership. He worked to dispel the image of church leaders as secretive and isolated and to demonstrate that the church was not a non-Christian cult and that Mormons were not, in his words, “weird people.” Stressing common ground with Christian churches, Hinckley joined them in opposing same-sex marriage and promoting so-called family values. He also promoted use of the church’s official name, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, instead of the more common “Mormon church.” He commissioned thousands of chapels and dozens of temples throughout the world, rebuilt the historic Mormon temple at Nauvoo, Ill., and oversaw the renovation of the Mormon Tabernacle and the construction of a new assembly hall in Salt Lake City. For his humanitarian and educational work Hinckley was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2004.
