Hollingsworth v. Perry,  legal case, decided by the U.S. Supreme Court on June 26, 2013, that had the practical effect of letting stand a federal district court’s ruling that California’s Proposition 8, which had amended the state’s constitution to define marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman, was unconstitutional.
After Proposition 8 was adopted in 2008, it was challenged in U.S. District Court by two same-sex couples who wished to marry. Because state officials refused to defend the law, the district court permitted its official proponents, a group of private citizens, to do so. The court found the law unconstitutional and ordered state officials to cease enforcing it. Proponents of the law appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which issued a stay of the district court’s order pending its decision. The Ninth Circuit in turn asked the California Supreme Court to determine whether proponents of a state ballot measure may “appeal a judgment invalidating [an] initiative, when the public officials charged with that duty refuse to do so.” After the California Supreme Court replied that the proponents were authorized to “assert the state’s interest in the initiative’s validity,” the Ninth Circuit concluded that they had legal standing under Article III of the U.S. Constitution, and it affirmed the district court’s holding that Proposition 8 was unconstitutional (though it left its stay in place to allow the proponents to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court). The Supreme Court granted a petition for certiorari in December 2012 but asked the parties to separately address the question of whether the proponents had standing to appeal.
In its ruling, the Supreme Court held (5–4) that the proponents did not have standing to appeal, because they had not suffered a “personal and tangible harm” that a favourable judicial decision would be likely to redress. The court thus vacated and remanded the Ninth Circuit’s decision with instructions that the case be dismissed. The court did not address the issue of the constitutionality of Proposition 8. Two days later, the Ninth Circuit lifted its stay of the district court’s order, and California resumed issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples, including to the original plaintiffs in the case, who were married that day. In a last-ditch maneuver, the proponents of Proposition 8 asked the Supreme Court to vacate the Ninth Circuit’s lifting of the stay on technical grounds and in order to allow them time to prepare a petition for a rehearing. The request was denied by Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, acting in his capacity as Circuit Justice for the Ninth Circuit.
The court’s opinion was written by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Elena Kagan, and Antonin Scalia. Justice Kennedy issued a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Samuel A. Alito, Jr., Sonia Sotomayor, and Clarence Thomas.
