John Thune, in full John Randolph Thune,  (born January 7, 1961, Pierre, South Dakota, U.S.), American politician who was elected as a Republican to the U.S. Senate in 2004 and began representing South Dakota the following year. He previously served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1997–2003).
While in high school, Thune met U.S. Rep. Jim Abdnor, who sparked his interest in politics. After earning a bachelor’s degree (1983) at Biola University, he studied business administration (M.B.A., 1984) at the University of South Dakota. Soon after graduating, he married Kimberley Weems, and the couple later had two children. From 1985 to 1986 Thune was an aide to Abdnor, who was then a senator, in Washington, D.C. Thune then worked for the Small Business Administration during the second term of Pres. Ronald Reagan. In 1989 he returned to South Dakota, where he served as executive director of the South Dakota Republican Party (1989–91), director of the State Railroad Division (1991–93), and director of the South Dakota Municipal League (1993–96).
In 1996 Thune was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, and he took office the following year. Having vowed to serve only three terms, he opted not to seek reelection in 2002 and instead ran for the U.S. Senate. He narrowly lost to Democratic incumbent Tim Johnson. Thune then challenged Tom Daschle in the 2004 senatorial race, and he defeated the Democratic Party leader in an extremely close race.
In Congress Thune earned a reputation as a conservative Republican who generally voted with the party leadership. He took particular interest in energy issues and was a proponent of renewable energy. He introduced numerous bills, including one to limit the power of the Environmental Protection Agency to impose curbs on the emission of carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide, or methane associated with agricultural practices. He also introduced legislation to repeal the federal estate tax. On social issues Thune sought to restrict abortion rights and opposed same-sex marriage.
