Lisa Murkowski, in full Lisa Ann Murkowski,  (born May 22, 1957, Ketchikan, Alaska, U.S.), American politician who was appointed as a Republican to the U.S. Senate from Alaska in 2002 and took office later that year. She was elected to that body in 2004.
Her father, Frank Murkowski, was an Alaskan banker turned politician who later served as a U.S. senator (1981–2002) and as governor (2002–06). After studying economics at Georgetown University (B.A., 1980), Lisa received a law degree (1985) from Willamette University in Salem, Oregon. She then moved to Anchorage, Alaska, where she worked in the district court and in private legal practice. In 1987 she married Verne Martell, and the couple later had two children.
In 1998 Murkowski ran for and was elected to the Alaska House of Representatives. In 2002 her father left the U.S. Senate to become governor, and in one of his first acts in office, he selected Lisa to serve out the remainder of his Senate term. She assumed the post later that year, and in 2004 she was elected to a full term. In 2010 Murkowski ran for reelection but was defeated in the Republican primary by a Tea Party challenger. She then launched a write-in campaign and won the general election. It was the first successful Senate write-in effort since Strom Thurmond’s election in 1954.
In the Senate, Murkowski initially developed a reputation as a conservative with some of the libertarian positions typical of politicians in the American West. Following her write-in victory, however, she often took a more moderate view, though she generally voted with her party, especially in opposition to federal agencies with oversight on Alaskan affairs (in particular, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of the Interior). She also pushed to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration and production. However, she often broke with Republicans on social issues. She notably voted to repeal (2010) “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” which prohibited openly gay men and women from serving in the U.S. military, and she supported same-sex marriage. In addition, she voted in favour of pro-choice legislation and voiced qualified support for stem-cell research.
