Matthew Shepard, in full Matthew Wayne Shepard,  (born December 1, 1976, Casper, Wyoming, U.S.—died October 12, 1998, Fort Collins, Colorado), American college student who was severely beaten because of his sexual orientation and was left to die in 1998. He was discovered and hospitalized, though he succumbed to his injuries. His death, which was evidence of the physical danger that homosexuals still sometimes faced in the United States, played a key role in the 2009 passage of legislation that expanded federal hate crime law to include violence committed because of the sexual orientation of the victim.
Shepard’s father was an oil rig inspector who worked in Saudi Arabia. Matthew attended high school in Casper, Wyoming, and at the American School in Switzerland before matriculating at the University of Wyoming at Laramie, where he studied foreign relations, languages, and political science. On campus Shepard had been open about his sexuality, and he was involved in the university’s lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) student association. On October 7, 1998, Shepard was befriended by two men, Aaron McKinney and Russell Henderson, who were posing as gay in order to lure him away from a local bar. They drove him to a rural area where they tied him to a fence, administered a brutal beating, and left him to die in the cold. Shepard was discovered 18 hours later by a bicyclist and was rushed, still alive but in a coma, to a hospital in Fort Collins, Colorado, where he died four days later. McKinney and Henderson were found guilty of murder.
Shepard’s death attracted widespread attention, not only in the small town of Laramie, which had a population of fewer than 30,000, but also across the country and around the world. Although federal laws at the time covered hate crimes based on race, colour, religion, and national origin, none included sexuality or sexual orientation. In 1998 Wyoming was one of 10 states that had no hate crime laws to protect specific categories of people. Shepard’s death was cited by figures within the gay rights movement as clear-cut evidence of the need for more-expansive federal hate crime legislation. In 2007 the Local Law Enforcement Hate Crimes Prevention Act (later dubbed the Matthew Shepard Act) was introduced to address these shortcomings in the law. Although the bill was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives, it was delayed because of widespread Republican opposition, including from U.S. Pres. George W. Bush, who threatened to veto it. In 2009 a modified version of the bill was finally approved by both the House and the Senate. Later that year U.S. Pres. Barack Obama signed the legislation, which was officially known as the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr., Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 2009; Byrd was an African American who was brutally killed by three white supremacists in 1998.
Shepard was memorialized by the Matthew Shepard Foundation, an organization begun by his parents, Dennis and Judy, with a mission to “replace hate with understanding, compassion, and acceptance” through various educational initiatives. Shepard was remembered in the play The Laramie Project, a chronicle of his death composed of interviews with Laramie residents that was created by the Tectonic Theater Project shortly after his death. Shepard was also the subject of two television movies—The Matthew Shepard Story and The Laramie Project (both 2002; the latter is a version of the play). Because of concerns that his grave site would be vandalized, Shepard was not buried until 2018, when his ashes were interred in the Washington National Cathedral in Washington, D.C.
