Metropolitan Community Churches (MCC), in full Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Community Churches,  worldwide Protestant denomination founded in 1968 and focusing its outreach endeavors on persons who identify themselves as homosexual, bisexual, transgender, and queer Christians. Although most MCC members are LGBTQ, membership is open to all individuals regardless of sexual orientation. A general conference, held every three years, governs the international body and votes on amendments to the bylaws, elects leaders, and handles other church business. A moderator, elected by the general council, serves as the spokesperson, CEO, and primary visionary of the MCC for a term of six years. The denomination claims approximately 40,000 members.
The MCC was founded by Troy Perry, an openly gay man who was defrocked as a Pentecostal pastor in the early 1960s after his sexuality became known. In the late 1960s Perry settled in Los Angeles, where he had a renewed sense of spirituality following a suicide attempt. On October 6, 1968, he held a worship service in his home for a small group that included homosexuals and heterosexuals. As Perry’s Los Angeles church quickly burgeoned to more than 200 people, he received inquiries from people in other cities seeking to found MCC congregations. At the first general conference, held in 1970, there were delegates in attendance from congregations in eight U.S. cities. The MCC ordained its first woman minister, Freda Smith, in 1972. In 2005 Perry retired as moderator of the MCC and was replaced by Nancy Wilson. Upon Wilson’s retirement in 2016, Rachelle Brown was appointed to serve as interim moderator until the election of a new moderator at the 2019 general conference.
The MCC accepts the Apostles’ Creed and the Nicene Creed but considers itself to be noncredal. Personal experience, as well as one’s sexual orientation and gender identity, are taught as important lenses through which Scripture and Christian beliefs are to be interpreted, and thus the traditional Christian views of marriage, gender, and sexual relations are largely rejected. Members of the MCC, particularly its clergy, have been vocal supporters of gay rights. The church has especially advocated the right of same-sex couples to marry (see same-sex marriage) and has maintained a rite of Holy Union since 1969. Its members have also been active in ministering to AIDS patients and in supporting research into the disease. With its international growth, the MCC has been a noted advocate for human rights in eastern Europe and in Latin America, championing causes such as employment and housing nondiscrimination laws and legal protections for persons living with HIV/AIDS.
The MCC has faced sometimes violent opposition and has been denied membership in the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., the national Christian ecumenical organization.
