Nabozny v. Podlesny,  case in which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit on July 31, 1996, ruled that public schools and their officials could be held liable for failing to protect homosexual students from antigay harassment and harm.
The case involved Jamie Nabozny, an openly gay student attending public school in Ashland, Wisconsin. The record reflected that in the seventh and eighth grades he was routinely harassed, beaten, and called derogatory names. There were incidents in which he was spat on, punched, and even subjected to a mock rape by two boys while some 20 students watched. Nabozny repeatedly informed school officials of the abuse, but they failed to discipline the other students. At one point, Mary Podlesny, the school’s principal, allegedly stated that “boys will be boys” and that if he was going to be openly gay, then he should expect to be subjected to harassment. After completing the eighth grade, Nabozny moved on to the local high school, where the mistreatment continued. During his sophomore year he was kicked repeatedly by another student and later needed surgery to repair the damage. As at his previous school, administrators did not end the abuse and allegedly blamed Nabozny for the harassment. He attempted suicide twice and later dropped out of school.
Nabozny subsequently filed a lawsuit against the Ashland school district and school officials. He claimed that, due to his sexual orientation, school officials had failed to protect him, a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause. In addition, he charged that they had increased his risk of harm, thereby violating his right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment. In 1995 a district court dismissed the case. On appeal it was argued before the Seventh Circuit Court, which found that school officials had violated Nabozny’s right to equal protection. However, the circuit court affirmed the lower court’s denial of his due process claim. The case was remanded for trial, and in November 1996 an out-of-court settlement was reached, in which Nabozny received $900,000. The court’s decision made clear that officials in public schools could be liable for financial damages if they failed to protect homosexual students.
