National LGBTQ Task Force, byname the Task Force, formerly National Gay Task Force (1973–85) and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (1985–2014),  American nongovernmental organization founded in 1973 that advocates for the civil rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) individuals. It was the first such national-level nonprofit organization, and it mobilizes state-level training of LGBTQ community organizers, activists, and community members.
The National LGBTQ Task Force has been instrumental in achieving political and legal rights for LGBTQ people. The organization campaigned to have homosexuality removed as a category of mental disorder in the 1970s. In that same time period it encouraged the Democratic Party to consider the civil and human rights of the gay community. In the 1980s the Task Force played a crucial role in pressuring national legislators to address the rising crisis of HIV/AIDS. In 1984 the organization issued the first extensive report on hate crimes directed at the gay community, documenting anti-gay victimization and violence. As a founding member organization of the Military Freedom Project, the Task Force helped set the framework for the 1993 debate about gays serving in the military.
Prior to the Obergefell v. Hodges U.S. Supreme Court decision in 2015, the group was pivotal in training local and state-level activists in community organizing strategies to support state legislation that would allow LGBTQ people to marry. The organization also founded the Transgender Civil Rights Project, which advocates laws at the federal, state, and local levels that ban discrimination along the lines of gender identity and expression. The Task Force galvanizes grassroots organizers and activists through the annual Creating Change conference, which draws attendees from all regions of the United States. The People of Color Organizing Institute is held the day preceding the Creating Change conference. Through the think tank of the Policy Institute, the Task Force sponsors analysis and research of issues that are important to the lives of LGBTQ individuals and families. The organization’s headquarters are in New York City.
