Tim Scott, in full Timothy Eugene Scott,  (born September 19, 1965, North Charleston, South Carolina, U.S.), American politician who was appointed as a Republican to the U.S. Senate from South Carolina in 2013 and won a special election the following year. He was the first African American to be elected to the Senate from a Southern state since Reconstruction. Scott previously served in the U.S. House of Representatives (2011–13).
Scott attended Presbyterian College on a football scholarship before transferring to Charleston Southern University, where he graduated with a bachelor’s degree (1988) in political science. He then worked in real estate, and by the early 1990s, he owned his own insurance agency.
In 1995 Scott entered electoral politics when he sought a seat on the Charleston County Council. He won and served until 2008. That year he successfully ran for a vacated seat in the state House of Representatives, and he took office in 2009. In 2010 Scott entered the race for the U.S. House of Representatives. Endorsed by various Tea Party factions, he defeated Paul Thurmond, son of the late Sen. Strom Thurmond, in the primary and easily won the general election. He assumed office in 2011. When James DeMint resigned in 2013, South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley appointed Scott to fill his Senate seat. Scott won a special election in 2014 to complete the term.
Scott was strongly conservative. He generally voted with the party leadership, opposing most initiatives undertaken by the administration of Pres. Barack Obama; he notably sought to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010; PPACA). Scott championed a constitutional amendment to balance the federal budget, and he advocated a ban on earmarks. On social issues, he opposed abortion rights and same-sex marriage.
In 2016 Scott was reelected to the Senate. He subsequently supported many of Republican Pres. Donald Trump’s policies. In 2017 he backed the president’s decision to withdraw from the Paris Agreement on climate change and voted to repeal the PPACA, though that legislation was defeated. That year he also helped pass a massive tax-reform bill. In 2019 the House voted to impeach Trump over allegations that he had withheld aid to Ukraine in order to pressure the country into opening a corruption investigation into Joe Biden, a political rival. The proceedings then shifted to the Republican-controlled Senate, and in February 2020 Scott voted to acquit Trump; the president was acquitted in a near-party line vote.
As his first full term in the Senate progressed, Scott grew increasingly vocal on issues of racism, especially as Trump made comments that some believed were racist. In 2018 he cosponsored a bill that would make lynching a federal crime, and two years later, amid nationwide protests over racial injustice, he drafted the Republican plan to deal with the issue. However, critics of the resulting legislation—which failed to pass the Senate—claimed that it did not do enough to address police reform.
