Troy Perry, full name Troy Deroy Perry,  (born July 27, 1940, Tallahassee, Florida, U.S.), American religious leader, gay rights and human rights activist, and founder of the Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Community Churches (UFMCC), better known as Metropolitan Community Churches (MCC). Open to all individuals regardless of sexual orientation, MCC focuses its outreach endeavours on persons who identify themselves as homosexual, bisexual, transgender, and queer Christians.
Perry’s tumultuous childhood, during which he experienced the death of his father and sexual abuse by his stepfather, led him to run away from home. He became active in the church as an adolescent and was licensed to preach when he was 15 years old. Though at first a Baptist, Perry joined the Church of God—a Pentecostal church based in Cleveland, Tennessee—and married Pearl Pinion, the minister’s daughter, in 1959. The couple moved to the Midwest so that Perry could begin studies at Midwest Bible College in Summit, Illinois, while serving as pastor of a church in Joliet, Illinois. Perry studied for two years at Midwest Bible College and then for one year at Moody Bible Institute in Chicago but was expelled from the church for being involved in a homosexual relationship. Perry then moved to southern California where he joined another Pentecostal church, the Church of God of Prophecy, keeping his homosexuality a secret. Perry continued to explore his homosexuality, which led to his divorce. He was defrocked as the pastor when his sexuality became known.
After serving in the U.S. Army from 1965 to 1967, Perry moved to Los Angeles. Having a renewed sense of spirituality—following a suicide attempt—he held a worship service in his home for a small group of 12 people, most of whom were homosexuals, on October 6, 1968. His nascent church continued to meet, and in 1969 he performed the first public same-sex wedding ceremony in the United States. In 1972 he published an autobiography, The Lord Is My Shepherd and He Knows I’m Gay.
MCC grew rapidly and eventually spread throughout the country and around the world. Perry retired from pastoral duties in 1973, when he became the first moderator of MCC, an elected position to serve as spokesperson, CEO, and primary visionary for the member congregations. He became a major national advocate of gay rights and AIDS awareness in the 1970s and ’80s. In 2003 he married Philip Ray DeBlieck in Canada. Perry retired as moderator in 2005.
