Jim Yong Kim, original name Kim Yong,  (born December 8, 1959, Seoul, South Korea), American physician and anthropologist who was the 12th president of the World Bank (2012–19).
Kim’s father was a dentist, and his mother was a scholar of neo-Confucianism. When he was five years old, the family emigrated from South Korea to the United States, eventually settling in Muscatine, Iowa, where his mother completed a doctorate at the nearby campus of the University of Iowa. During his youth, Kim switched the order of his name to Yong Kim, according to Western style, and added the first name Jim. He was educated in the local public schools; in high school he joined the Model UN (an educational simulation of the United Nations), played on the basketball and football teams, and was class valedictorian, graduating in 1978.
Kim began his college education at the University of Iowa but transferred in his second year to Brown University and graduated magna cum laude with a bachelor’s degree in human biology (1982). He then attended Harvard University for graduate work in both medicine (M.D., 1991) and anthropology (Ph.D., 1993). At Harvard he befriended Paul Farmer, who was in the same academic programs and shared Kim’s interest in global health issues. In 1987 they and several others cofounded the Boston-based organization Partners in Health (PIH), which provided medical care in poor regions around the world, including Haiti. Kim also led the group’s pioneering work with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB) patients in Carabayllo, Peru (a Lima slum), in the mid-1990s.
As an outgrowth of that work, Kim led a successful campaign for a drastic reduction in the cost of MDR TB treatments by pharmaceutical companies, an effort he later also applied to AIDS treatments. As adviser to the director-general of the World Health Organization (2003–04) and as director of its department of HIV/AIDS (2004–05), he led the “3 by 5” initiative to provide antiretroviral drugs to three million new HIV and AIDS patients around the world by 2005. (The program met its goal in 2007.)
Kim taught at Harvard Medical School from 1993 until 2009, when he was named president of Dartmouth College. His challenges there included a fraternity hazing scandal and a budget crisis; his tenure was considered to have been a mixed success. In March 2012 U.S. Pres. Barack Obama nominated him for the position of World Bank president. Although Kim lacked a background in finance, his experience in working with poor communities and his familiarity with development issues were considered assets. On April 16, 2012, Kim was confirmed as World Bank president, and he took office on July 1. Among his priorities were to help developing countries make progress against poverty, to create more support programs for the poor, and to identify and foster emerging markets, especially in Africa. In 2016 he was reappointed to another five-year term, which began in 2017. Two years later, however, Kim stepped down as World Bank president. His awards include a MacArthur Foundation fellowship (2003).
