Laryngectomy,  surgical procedure to remove all or a portion of the larynx (voice box). The procedure most often is used to treat persons affected by cancer of the larynx when chemotherapy is unsuccessful. However, it may also be performed when gunshot wounds, severe fractures, or other trauma affect the larynx. Viennese surgeon Theodor Billroth performed the first complete laryngectomy in 1873.
A laryngectomy may be partial or total. In a partial laryngectomy, only a portion of the larynx or the surrounding muscles is removed. Although the voice is not lost and the individual may retain his or her usual patterns of speech and swallowing, the voice may sound weak or hoarse. The larynx is completely removed in a total laryngectomy, which alters breathing and communication. A stoma (permanent opening) created in the front of the neck allows the individual to breathe, but speech is altered. People who have had laryngectomies are known as laryngectomees; some refer to themselves as “larries.”
Laryngectomees are taught one of three alternative ways of talking to restore communication: esophageal speech, tracheoesophageal speech, or electronic (or artificial larynx) speech. The goal is to learn a new speaking technique that is the most comfortable for the individual.
In esophageal speech, the individual draws air in through the mouth and forces the air into the esophagus by locking the tongue. The process is similar to a controlled burp. Esophageal speech is less costly than other methods because it requires no equipment or surgery. However, the challenge of vocal phrasing and the low volume of speech that results may make it difficult for others to understand the individual.
Tracheoesophageal speech is similar to esophageal speech, but the individual uses a device to redirect air from the trachea into the esophagus. The device is inserted at the stoma site and into an opening that is made surgically between the trachea and the esophagus in a procedure known as tracheoesophageal puncture. A small one-way valve placed into the opening allows the laryngectomee to force air from the lungs into the mouth. This method results in a more natural-sounding voice when compared with esophageal speech.
Electronic speech involves the use of an electronic, or artificial, larynx, which creates a clearer voice and increases vocal volume. There are two types of artificial larynxes. The extraoral (neck-held) type is a small battery-powered hand-held device that has a vibrating disk on one end. When pressed against the upper neck or throat, the vibrations facilitate the transfer of sound into the throat and oral cavity. The intraoral type consists of a small external battery pack that is connected by a wire to a sound emitter. Other models feature a mouth tube that is connected to a cuplike device that covers the stoma.
Following laryngectomy, some people experience depression and social withdrawal because of the changes in their voices and the reactions of others. A number of support groups have been established for laryngectomees, and many patients find that joining such groups is beneficial. Most laryngectomees successfully return to their jobs and resume most of their usual activities.
