Strategic weapons system,   any weapons system designed to strike an enemy at the source of his military, economic, or political power. In practice, this means destroying a nation’s cities, factories, military bases, transportation and communications infrastructure, and seat of government. Strategic weapons systems use atomic or thermonuclear devices, because only these weapons have sufficient explosive power to destroy, with relative ease and quickness, the entire war-making capability of a large nation. The term strategic weapons system refers not merely to the explosive devices themselves but rather to the complex delivery systems that enable these warheads to reach their targets. Indeed, the distinguishing feature of a strategic weapons system is its ability to deliver thermonuclear warheads accurately from one continent to another.
Strategic weapons systems can consist of any of the following delivery systems: intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), that is, missiles having a range exceeding 3,500 miles (5,630 km); some intermediate-range ballistic missiles (IRBMs), that is, missiles having a range between 600 and 3,500 miles (965 and 5,630 km); submarine-launched ballistic missiles, which are in effect IRBMs or ICBMs launched from submarines; and cruise missiles, which are shorter-range missiles that can be launched from aircraft, ships, or submarines and can thereby reach strategic distances. All these delivery systems carry thermonuclear warheads. Another important strategic weapons system is that of long-range heavy bombers, or strategic bombers, which can fly intercontinental distances and drop free-fall bombs or launch cruise missiles, both thermonuclear-armed.
The considerations involved in managing the storage, maintenance, and accurate delivery of these weapons are numerous. The missile itself requires maintenance and security of its propulsion system and propellant; its internal guidance system; its on-board computer, if any; and its payload, the reentry vehicle (RV) or warhead. If it carries a cluster of multiple independently targeted RVs (MIRVs), then the risk is multiplied. In addition, the silo in which each missile is mounted—or the submarine or airplane, and, if the latter, its base—and its readiness to function when needed are concerns, as are the up-to-dateness of the target that each RV is programmed to hit, the launch-control procedure, and the intricate communications web that holds the system together.
Five countries—the United States, Russia (heir to the Soviet Union), China, the United Kingdom, and France—operated such systems in the late 20th century, but only the first two maintained missile arsenals large enough to require strategic weapons systems of extreme complexity.
In the late 20th century, Western knowledge of the strategic weapons system of China was limited. At least 60 IRBMs were known to be stationed in western China, and small numbers of ICBMs were known to exist. The Chinese also possessed a type of submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM). France maintained two strategic systems in the late 20th century. One was built around a two-stage, solid-fueled IRBM carrying a thermonuclear warhead. The other was based on a submarine-launched IRBM with three solid-propellant stages. The United Kingdom operated a submarine-launched system equipped with older U.S. Polaris missiles.
The United States had two active ICBM systems—the Minuteman, with 950 missiles, and the newer MX, with 50 missiles. The United States had cruise missiles for launching from submarines, surface ships, and land and from the bombers of the Strategic Air Command (SAC). The other U.S. missile systems—the obsolescent Polaris, and the Poseidon and Trident systems—were all submarine-launched. All U.S. missile systems used solid propellant. SAC had two types of strategic bombers, the B-52 and the newer B-1.
In the late 20th century, Russia maintained numerous major silo-launched ICBM systems, with the U.S. designations of SS-11, SS-16, SS-17, SS-18, SS-19, SS-20, SS-23, SS-24, and SS-25. Russia also had submarine-launched systems and strategic bombers. The latest Soviet ICBMs used solid propellants, in contrast to their liquid-fueled predecessors.
Many missiles in service had internal computers; all could carry thermonuclear warheads; and most had the capacity to carry from 3 to 14 or more MIRVs. Cruise missiles could carry only one warhead.
Each of these weapons systems was an intricate network of communications among people and missiles carrying hydrogen bombs. Elaborate design, engineering, and programming of the “fail-safe” variety was meant to minimize the chance that a computer failure or some simple accident would set off a major catastrophe. For this reason, the most critical concern in the maintenance and operation of strategic weapons systems was to provide certain and secure communication between civil and military commanders and to provide “backup” computer and other facilities wherever failure of a component could have lethal consequences.
