Abram Stevens Hewitt,  (born July 31, 1822, Haverstraw, N.Y., U.S.—died  Jan. 18, 1903, Ringwood, N.J.), American industrialist, philanthropist, and politician who in 1886 defeated Henry George and Theodore Roosevelt to become mayor of New York City.
Hewitt won a scholarship to Columbia College (now part of Columbia University). He graduated in 1842 and remained at Columbia as an instructor of mathematics. He then went into the iron-making business with Edward and Peter Cooper. The firm was a success and Hewitt became wealthy. A man of distinct social conscience, Hewitt produced gun-barrel iron for the federal government during the Civil War without taking a profit.
In 1870 Hewitt’s company began the first commercial-grade steel production in the United States. A year later he joined with Edward Cooper and Samuel J. Tilden in a campaign to oust the Tweed Ring from controlling both the Tammany Hall Democratic organization and the municipal government of New York City. In 1874 Hewitt won a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives, where he remained (with the exception of the 1879–81 term) until 1886. He was chairman of the Democratic National Committee in the Tilden–Rutherford B. Hayes presidential campaign of 1876, and he played a prominent role in the crisis resulting from the disputed outcome of the election.
The three-way race in 1886 for mayor of New York City pitted Hewitt, the Democratic candidate, against Henry George of the United Labor ticket and Theodore Roosevelt on the Republican ballot. Hewitt’s victory was a personal triumph, and he proceeded to rupture relations with Tammany Hall by administering a comprehensive reform program. After one term, he retired from politics.
Hewitt’s philanthropic endeavours began with the establishment of the Cooper Union school in 1859. He was chairman of the board that drew up the charter, and he later served as secretary of the board, directing the school’s educational and financial operations. In 1902 he contributed a $600,000 endowment to Cooper Union.
