academy,  a society of learned individuals organized to advance art, science, literature, music, or some other cultural or intellectual area of endeavour. From its original reference in Greek to the philosophical school of Plato, the word has come to refer much more generally to an institution of learning or a group of learned persons.
At the close of the Middle Ages, academies began to be formed in Italy, for the study first of classical and then of Italian literature. One of the earliest was the Platonic Academy, founded in Florence in 1442 by two Greek scholars with the encouragement of Cosimo de’ Medici. Literary academies sprang up throughout Italy in the 16th and 17th centuries; the most famous of these was the Crusca Academy, founded in Florence by A.F. Grazzini in 1582.
The French Academy, which would become Europe’s best-known literary academy, began in 1635. The Royal Spanish Academy was founded in 1713 to preserve the Spanish language, and it published a landmark Spanish dictionary for that purpose.
Academies of science began to appear in the 16th century, and academies of fine arts, music, social sciences, medicine, mining, and agriculture were formed from the 18th century on. More than 50 countries now have at least one academy or learned society that is sanctioned by the state and represented on international councils of learned societies. The influence of the academies was greatest during the 17th and 18th centuries but declined during the 19th, in part because academies tended to resist new and unorthodox developments in science and culture.
The United States, like Great Britain, Canada, and other English-speaking countries, has no state-established academies of science or literature—a fact reflective of English beliefs that culture should basically be a matter for private initiative. The first learned society in what would become the United States was founded by Benjamin Franklin in 1743 and was called the American Philosophical Society. The rival American Academy of Arts and Sciences was founded in 1779, and the National Academy of Sciences was founded in Washington, D.C., in 1863. Russia’s Imperial Academy of Sciences was founded by Peter the Great in St. Petersburg in 1724 and renamed the Academy of Sciences in 1925.
Academies and learned societies also followed European expansion elsewhere in the world. The Academies of Languages of Colombia (1871) and Venezuela (1873) provided affiliated institutions for the Royal Spanish Academy. More recently, state-sponsored societies were founded to promote the advancement of Western learning for national unity and development. The Japan Academy traces its roots back to the Tokyo Academy founded in 1879. The Chinese Academy of Sciences (Academica Sinica) was founded in 1928 to coordinate research in all fields. India’s National Science Academy was established as the National Institute of Sciences in 1935, and the National Academy of Letters (Sahitya Akademi) was founded in 1952. International councils of learned sciences that are now sponsored by UNESCO are the International Council for Philosophic and Humanistic Studies (1919), the International Council of Scientific Unions (1919), and the International Social Sciences Council (1951).
The term academy is also used to designate special secondary schools (often private and demanding in terms of entrance requirements) or colleges in which specific subjects are emphasized—e.g., military or naval affairs, agriculture, fine arts, music, or business. See also preparatory school.
