Accountability,  principle according to which a person or institution is responsible for a set of duties and can be required to give an account of their fulfilment to an authority that is in a position to issue rewards or punishment. Despite the apparent precision of this definition, controversy has arisen about the exact meaning of accountability.
The term accountable originates from the Latin computare, “to count.” To be accountable required a person to produce “a count” of either the properties or money that had been left in his care. This meaning has endured in all those forms of accountability that are exercised through financial bookkeeping or budgetary records. But more discursive meanings of being accountable, in the sense of “giving an account,” also emerged early in the history of the term. Accountability as an abstract noun therefore refers to both the capacity of and the obligation on someone to produce an account. Yet, it was not in political or legal discussions that accountability first developed as a term of art or as a fully developed and self-standing concept. In politics and administration, responsibility was the technical term that was preferred to indicate the duty that persons in public authority had to “respond” in their conduct and actions as public officials. In law, liability was (and is) preferred to indicate that by doing a certain action (or entering into a certain contract) a person has put himself under an obligation and is therefore answerable for the consequences following from that action (or from entering into that contract). Thus, for a considerable time, accountability was part of a family of words in English that covered a number of interrelated meanings that had to do with issues of political representation, executive and administrative responsibility, and, more loosely, legal liability. The relationships between and within these semantic fields, however, have lately been transformed, with accountability taking on a life of its own.
Two facts stand to indicate the late emergence of accountability as a specific concept. One is its historical absence from dictionaries and encyclopaedias until fairly recently (the 1980s). The other is the lack of precise equivalents in most other languages. This has been noted in the literature because of the internationalization of academic life and the increasing dominance of English as a lingua franca (particularly in international organizations). As accountability has acquired a more prominent role in discussions conducted in English about governance, public administration reform, and the quality of democracy, it has become evident how the semantic field covered by the various uses of accountability cannot easily be captured in other languages, where it was traditionally translated by a group of words that had a closer affinity to the term responsibility: responsabilité (French), responsabilidad (Spanish), Verantwortlichkeit (German). Interestingly, in the Romance languages there is no specific word for liability either, which is similarly rendered by contextual uses of the equivalents of responsibility.
One interpretation of this peculiarity has been to suggest that English, unlike other languages, has developed the concept of accountability to capture at a semantic level a series of practices and institutional structures typical of democracies of the Anglo-American type. Such an interpretation fails to appreciate how closely interrelated the developments of the meanings of accountability and responsibility are in English. It also shows a lack of appreciation (or indeed basic knowledge) of the constitutional and administrative discourses and practices of other countries, where the conceptual elements conveyed by accountability were rendered by a different constellation of terms. It is, however, true that recent developments in politics and management have contributed to the redefinition of accountability and that, as this term has tended to acquire new connotations and normative force, attempts at a direct translation have become more problematic and, nonetheless, more imperative because of the increasing dominance of English as an international language.
To understand the original applications of accountability, some distinctions may be in order. The first set of distinctions refers to the areas to which the idea of accountability may apply. Normally, accountability is said to apply to positions of public office. These comprise both political positions, where representatives or people covering other institutional roles deal with public affairs in the name and interest of the citizens, and administrative positions, where the link with the citizens is mediated by the government. The chain of accountability is different in the two cases, and so is the form that accountability takes. Political accountability is of a more inscrutable nature. In democracies, it depends, on the one hand, on the form and mechanisms of political representation, linking citizens to their legislators, and, on the other hand, on the formalized relationship between executive and legislative powers. Both types of political accountability rely on a rather weak power of control because the position of the “agents” in those two relationships is comparatively stronger in either their knowledge or their ability to control the agenda. Ultimately, legislators can be voted out of office by their constituencies, although governments can be brought down by parliaments (though this does not apply in presidential systems), but whether this is the result of the process of strict accountability for what legislators or governments do while in office or of a more general political evaluation, subject to opinion’s trends, by the electorate remains a moot point. Administrative accountability is apparently more straightforward because it operates within a more definite hierarchical structure where there is a certain division of labour and competencies and where both the content and the process of public decision making and, hence, the role played by individuals can be examined in more detail. There is another area of political and administrative accountability that is concerned less with how well (or badly) public officials operate in the public interest and more with whether they abuse their position of authority. Accountability is here concerned with reducing the opportunities for corruption, maladministration, or legal impropriety that come to people in positions of power. Political and administrative institutions have a series of mechanisms and internal instruments for policing abuses of power, but, ultimately, accountability relies on more traditional legal instruments and the operations of the legal system and the courts at large. Much of the effectiveness of this kind of legal accountability depends on the nature of the legal system itself, as well as on the level of independence of the judiciary from political power.
The second set of distinctions regards the process of accountability. This is concerned with three different questions: who is accountable, to whom, and for what? In the case of political accountability, where this operates as a general mechanism through which citizens hold their legislators accountable through the electoral process, the questions of who and to whom would seem straightforward. Less clear is the answer to the question for what. Indeed, the relationship between the actions and decisions of politicians and their direct consequences is a matter of intense political contention. Besides, no simple mechanism can be devised to hold politicians and governments accountable for the series of often-unrelated decisions that they take during the period they are in office. The issue is somewhat simpler in the case of ministerial and administrative accountability because it may be easier to apportion responsibility and blame when dealing with more specific policy issues or administrative decisions and when the chain of causes and effects can be more easily isolated from the context of other policies and decisions and from the general circumstances of economic and social life. Even so, ministerial and administrative accountability is often easier to deal with (at least conceptually) in cases of maladministration than when trying to establish how well or badly people in public office have operated—an issue that, as can be seen in the following section, has become increasingly central to the definition of public accountability.
When dealing with administrative responsibility, the questions of who is accountable and to whom are rather complex. They suffer, respectively, from the problems that come from “many hands” and “many eyes.” It is indeed often difficult to identify with precision where responsibility lies in decisions taken about complex problems in complex organizations. No single person would have been involved, and it is not easy to apportion either praise or blame if not in the most obvious instances. The principle of ministerial responsibility, often invoked in many constitutional systems, would suggest that responsibility moves upward and that some degree of knowledge and intervention by people higher in the decision-making hierarchy would put on them, rather than on their subordinates, the onus of responsibility and accountability. This is, of course, the theory. The practice of modern governments rarely conforms to such a standard, relying on the obvious (and occasionally self-serving) justification that too many hands were involved and that higher officials should not take the blame for operational mishaps. Moreover, it is often difficult to distinguish between political and administrative decisions, so that—as put forth by critics of the justifications adduced by the U.S. and the U.K. governments for the Iraq War—combined failures tend to cover each other up, with no one ultimately being accountable or taking the blame.
A similar problem arises when one considers accountability from the reverse perspective of the identification of the people “to whom” officials (particularly in the public administration) should be accountable. It would seem that, in the most immediate sense, public servants are directly accountable to politicians and the government of the day. Yet, public servants’ accountability to their political “masters,” or to their superiors in the bureaucratic hierarchy, can only be justified as part of a longer chain, making them ultimately accountable to the citizens and the public at large. This longer chain becomes both evident and problematic when dealing with issues such as whistle-blowing, where the public interest is pitched against the duty of confidentiality in acts of government and where “private” judgment is weighed against the role one has in the public chain of command and responsibility. Furthermore, as the traditional hierarchical structure of government becomes more diffuse, the problem of “many eyes”—who the “principals” in the accountability relationship are—becomes more acute.
