Acculturation,  the processes of change in artifacts, customs, and beliefs that result from the contact of two or more cultures. The term is also used to refer to the results of such changes. Two major types of acculturation, incorporation and directed change, may be distinguished on the basis of the conditions under which cultural contact and change take place.
Incorporation refers to the free borrowing and modification of cultural elements and occurs when people of different cultures maintain contact as well as political and social self-determination. It may involve syncretism, a process through which people create a new synthesis of phenomena that differs from either original culture; adoption, in which an entirely new phenomenon is added to a cultural repertoire; and adaptation, in which a new material or technology is applied to an extant phenomenon. Religious beliefs are often incorporated in a syncretic manner, as with synthesis of indigenous and Roman Catholic beliefs in much of Mexico. Technology is often subject to adoption, as with the rapid diffusion of new metalworking techniques and weapon types that marked the transition from the Stone Age to the Bronze Age, and later to the Iron Age in Asia, Africa, and Europe. Ornamentation is often subject to adaptation, as when Native American groups replaced heavy stone pendants with metal ornaments in the period between Columbian contact and military conquest; such ornaments are readily visible in historical portraits of important indigenous personages. Because incorporation is a product of free choice, the changes it engenders are often retained over the long term.
In contrast, directed change occurs when one group establishes dominance over another through military conquest or political control; thus, imperialism is the most common precursor to directed change. Like incorporation, directed change involves the selection and modification of cultural characteristics. However, these processes are more varied and the results more complex because they derive from the interference in one cultural system by members of another. The processes that operate under conditions of directed change include forced assimilation—the complete replacement of one culture by another—and resistance against aspects of the dominant culture. Because directed change is imposed upon the members of the recipient culture, often quite harshly, the changes it engenders are less likely to be maintained over the long term.
