Afrikaner-Broederbond, English Afrikaner Brotherhood,  South African secret society composed of Afrikaans-speaking Protestant, white men over the age of 25. Although its political power was extensive and evident throughout South African society for many decades, its rituals and membership—by invitation only—remained secret.
The organization was established in 1918 for the purpose of counteracting the humiliating defeat of the Afrikaners by the British in the South African War (1899–1902). A 1964 government commission observed that the Broederbond was an organization “in which Afrikaners could find each other in the midst of great confusion and disunity and be able to work together for the survival of the Afrikaner people in South Africa and the promotion of its interests.” Through the Broederbond, Afrikaner men hoped to foster Afrikaner culture and traditions in the face of ill treatment by British South Africans and second-class citizenship. The Broederbond’s silent network became a means to power, and the organization was considered to be the significant force behind the rise to national dominance in 1948 of the largely Afrikaner National Party. Several South African prime ministers, including Daniel F. Malan and Hendrik F. Verwoerd, were members.
Despite its association with the conservative Dutch Reformed Church and the apartheid-promoting National Party, the Broederbond gradually began to change its position and in 1990 began to actively support Pres. F.W. de Klerk’s announced dismantling of the official policy of apartheid.
In 1994 the organization changed its name to Afrikanerbond (“Afrikaner League”) and began the transformation into a transparent organization open to any Afrikaans-speaking South African over the age of 18, irrespective of colour, sex, or religion. The Afrikanerbond adopted a new constitution in 2006 that identified the group as being principally of and for Afrikaans-speaking people in South Africa but with the stated aim of working with other organizations as well as the government to improve life in South Africa for all citizens.
