Agency,  an independent administrative authority that participates in running specific parts of an economy or society.
Agencies undertake analysis and make decisions to regulate economic and social issues for which steering by the “invisible hand” of the market is judged to be either ineffective or inappropriate and where direct governmental intervention is considered undesirable. Indeed, to grasp the importance of agencies within a large number of today’s polities, one must first understand their inextricable link with the growth of regulatory public policies. Only then can one begin to tackle the complex set of challenges created by the establishment and proliferation of agencies.
Although often considered new phenomena, agencies first came into being in the 1870s in the United Kingdom and the United States as a means to referee and encourage economic competition in sectors such as the railways and electricity. During the next century, agencies grew in piecemeal fashion as quasi-governmental bodies, designed to ensure that laws and rules were respected even in areas such as the quality of broadcasting. However, in the 1980s—a decade marked by fundamental, neoliberal criticism of the role of public authority in the economy and society—agencies were given a new lease on life as a means of promoting the regulation of an ever-extending number of markets and sectors.
At the heart of the diagnoses of the failure of the state to intervene effectively in the economy lay a deep-seated critique of a redistributive type of public policy associated with the interventionist welfare state. Such policies had three principal characteristics. First, they frequently entailed a transfer of ownership of the means of production and the provision of services through the nationalization of industry. Second, economic planning was engaged in by governments to politically direct investment to key sectors or prioritized geographical areas. Third, governments intervened directly, and often heavily, in markets and sectors through systems of subsidies, quotas, and taxes to encourage certain policy outcomes over others. Since 1980, governments inspired instead by neoliberal conceptions of the economy and society have abandoned nationalization and planning while seriously tempering their respective forms of interventionism. Indeed, in many if not most cases, interventions are no longer legitimized by the goal of redistribution but, rather, by highlighting how regulatory-type policies can bring about more efficient policy outcomes.
Agencies have thus been reinvented as a means of implementing a new approach to economic and social governance. This approach depends heavily on faith in the efficiency of markets as a means of distributing wealth and life chances. But it also recognizes that in some issue areas markets fail as a regulatory mechanism, thereby necessitating the intervention of bodies that must be expert in their respective fields and independent from political interference. Three types of market failure have frequently been tackled through the establishment of agencies: the emergence of monopolies (e.g., in the telecommunications sector), negative externalities (e.g., damage to the environment by intensive agriculture), and the production of deficient public goods (e.g., poor public health caused by unscrupulous food manufacturers). Agencies have been devised as an antidote to such problems either by becoming watchdogs that alert governments to the abuse of laws and regulations or by regulating governments themselves in the name of efficiency, consumer protection, and, less frequently, the citizen.
Today, if most public actors either champion agencies enthusiastically as defenders of the public good or at least defend them reluctantly as a necessary evil, it is generally accepted that these bodies pose at least four series of challenges for governance and even for democracy.
As specialists of public policy never cease to emphasize, a great many decisions about regulation are taken during the implementation of laws and policies. Consequently, most agencies are frequently called on to overstep the line and actually make policy, not least by developing doctrines and instruments with which to put into practice often vague primary legislation.
Many policy areas regulated by agencies are highly complex and involve large amounts of detailed legislation. Specialists therefore are needed not only within the agencies but also within the public and private organizations that they regulate. At worst, interactions between these specialists can produce sets of rules that only they can decipher, thus excluding wide ranges of practitioners and consumer representatives.
Be it genuine or perceived, lack of transparency within agencies clearly poses problems for elected politicians in general and officeholders in particular. This problem is less acute in polities such as the United States, where public congressional auditions of agency representatives are commonplace. Elsewhere, however, and in Europe in particular, agencies often have less direct linkages to elected assemblies. Consequently, it is feared that these bodies will become independent of governmental structures and pursue either their own agendas or those of the dominant actors they ostensibly regulate.
Finally, excessive agency autonomy in turn begs the question of the capacity of contemporary public administrations to develop and apply coherent political goals across a wide range of economic and social sectors. This question has been raised, for example, in the European Union over the case of competition policy. Many actors argued that regulating competition should be taken out of the hands of the European Commission and given to a Europe-wide agency dedicated to this issue area. Defenders of the commission replied that it should continue to regulate competition because it alone has the necessary information and political legitimacy to ensure that decisions over this issue are made on the basis of values rather than just on the basis of legal or economic expertise.
