Akram al-Hawrani,  (born 1910, Ḥamāh, Syria—died 1996, Amman, Jordan), radical politician and populist leader who had a determining influence on the course of Syrian politics in the two decades after World War II.
Hawrani’s radical orientation had its roots in direct personal experience rather than in intellectual reflection. He resented the large landlords’ exploitation of the Syrian peasantry and strove to rouse the latter to a militant defense of their interests. After Adib al-Shishakli seized power with a military coup in December 1949, Hawrani gave expression to the ideological impulses of the regime by leading agitation on behalf of the peasantry. Shishakli banned political parties in 1951, however, and Hawrani became estranged from the regime.
Late in 1952 Hawrani fled to Lebanon with Michel ʿAflaq, leader of the Baʿth Party, which espoused Arab unity and socialism. Hawrani and ʿAflaq decided to combine their efforts. Although their role in the overthrow of Shishakli (February 1954) was not critical, the Baʿth under their influence became a dynamic element in Syrian and inter-Arab affairs. They were instrumental in the events that led to formation of the United Arab Republic (U.A.R.; a union of Syria and Egypt) in 1958.
Hawrani became a vice president of the U.A.R. and chairman of the executive council for the Syrian province. But despite the expectation of the Baʿth leaders that they would exert a considerable measure of influence over Syrian affairs, the party’s power was sharply reduced. Hawrani and the other Baʿthists who held important offices resigned en bloc from the U.A.R. government in December 1959. In 1961 Syria seceded from the U.A.R., and Hawrani became a deputy in the newly formed Syrian parliament.
Hawrani denounced the Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser’s dictatorial policies and eventually broke with ʿAflaq, who still saw Nasser as the only person around whom an effective Arab union could be built. Hawrani formed a new party, and ʿAflaq declared him to have been expelled from the Baʿth. The secessionist regime was overthrown by a military coup in March 1963, and Hawrani was jailed. Though subsequently released, he ceased to play a vital role in Syrian affairs.
