Alfred M. Tozzer,  (born July 4, 1877, Lynn, Mass., U.S.—died  Oct. 5, 1954, Cambridge, Mass.), U.S. anthropologist and archaeologist who made substantial contributions to knowledge of the culture and language of the Maya Indians of Mexico and Central America.
Hoping to find the key to deciphering Maya hieroglyphic writing, Tozzer examined the culture and language of a Maya group in the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico. His dissertation, based on his work (published as A Comparative Study of the Mayas and the Lacandones in 1907), earned him his Ph.D. (1904) from Harvard University. Following studies with Franz Boas at Columbia University (1904), he returned to the country of the Lacandón people for further linguistic explorations. For Harvard’s Peabody Museum he directed an expedition to Guatemala (1909–10), finding correlations between stylistic changes in Mayan architecture and dated inscriptions and discovering important ruins at Holmul.
Tozzer considered it essential for a comprehensive assessment of a culture to integrate ethnology, archaeology, and linguistic study. Shortly after World War I he was appointed chairman of the department of anthropology at Harvard. His Maya Grammar (1921) is a report of his findings at Santiago Ahuizolta, Mex., the site of his final Middle American field efforts. In Social Origins and Social Continuities (1925) he rejected widely held views on the necessity of migration and cultural diffusion to effect cultural change and asserted that the socially learned behaviour basic to a culture must be examined independently of biological phenomena. A definitive contribution to Maya ethnohistory is his edition and translation (1941) of the Relación de las cosas de Yucatán (c. 1566; “On the Things of Yucatán”) by the Spanish bishop Diego de Landa. This major source on 16th-century Yucatán ethnology made possible the decipherment of Maya inscriptions dealing with chronology and divination.
Following a period of government service in Hawaii during World War II, Tozzer returned to Harvard in 1945 and remained there until his retirement in 1948. Just before his death he completed Chichén Itzá and Its Cenote of Sacrifice (1957), a major work synthesizing the Yucatán history prior to Spanish conquest.
