Alice Throckmorton McLean,  (born March 8, 1886, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Oct. 25, 1968, Baltimore, Md.),  social service organizer who established and oversaw a large and highly successful organization that provided material aid, assistance, and information to both the American armed forces and civilians during World War II.
McLean traveled widely as a child, mastered several languages, and was educated privately. An early marriage to Edward L. Tinker, a lawyer, ended in divorce, and she resumed her maiden name. Until 1938 McLean led the life of a wealthy socialite. In that year, however, while visiting England she learned of the work of the Women’s Voluntary Services, a volunteer organization doing war-related work on the home front. After studying similar groups in other European nations, she returned to the United States in 1939 and began enlisting friends in what was at first an entirely informal series of activities aimed at promoting the idea of volunteer social service.
In 1940 she organized the American Women’s Voluntary Services (AWVS). Despite the prevailing mood of isolationism in the nation at that time, McLean succeeded in rapidly building a sizable organization interested in preparing the home front for war. By the time of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, the AWVS numbered more than 18,000 members who were trained in ambulance driving, evacuation procedures, mobile-kitchen operation, first aid, and other emergency services. The entry of the United States into the war greatly increased the number of volunteers, and training in automobile mechanics, cryptography, switchboard operation, and other skills was added to the AWVS’s program. Volunteers provided relief and food services to armed forces posts, disaster workers, and wounded servicemen and at other times served as fire watchers, crop pickers, motor vehicle drivers, and photographers. AWVS workshops turned out more than one million new or reconditioned articles of clothing for servicemen, hospitals, and other users while also publishing booklets and conducting public classes for housewives about preserving and repairing clothing.
AWVS members sold more than $1 billion worth of war bonds and stamps during the war. By 1945 the organization’s members totaled some 325,000, and the more than 200 junior auxiliary groups had enrolled over 32,000 young people. McLean continued as president of the AWVS, which was still in existence at the time of her death.
