Amelia Bloomer, in full Amelia Jenks Bloomer, née Amelia Jenks,  (born May 27, 1818, Homer, New York, U.S.—died December 30, 1894, Council Bluffs, Iowa), American reformer who campaigned for temperance and women’s rights.
Amelia Jenks was educated in a local school and for several years thereafter taught school and was a private tutor. In 1840 she married Dexter C. Bloomer, a Quaker newspaper editor of Seneca county, through whom she became interested in public affairs. She began contributing articles to newspapers on various topics and was an early and staunch member of the local women’s Temperance Society. Bloomer attended but took no part in the Seneca Falls Convention organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott in 1848. In January of the following year, however, she began a newspaper for women, probably the first to be edited entirely by a woman—The Lily: A Ladies Journal Devoted to Temperance and Literature—and opened its pages to women’s rights advocates as well as temperance reformers.
Although she was rather slow to embrace the cause of women’s rights, Bloomer by 1853 had become quite active, making speaking appearances in New York City and elsewhere. She became involved in a dress-reform movement as well when she began appearing in public wearing full-cut pantaloons, or “Turkish trousers,” under a short skirt. She attracted considerable ridicule for appearing in the costume, and the pantaloons came to be called “bloomers.” Although she had not originated the costume—among others, actress Fanny Kemble and reformer Lydia Sayer (Hasbrouck) had worn it as early as 1849, and Elizabeth Smith Miller had actually introduced it to Bloomer and Stanton early in 1851—Bloomer’s defense of it in The Lily linked her name with it indissolubly. The episode had the unfortunate effect of distracting attention from her reform efforts, but she continued to publish The Lily in Seneca Falls, where she was also deputy postmistress, and later in Mount Vernon, Ohio, where she assisted her husband on the Western Home Visitor. In 1855 she sold the newspaper, but her interest in reform, expressed in writing and lectures, continued until her death some 40 years later.
