American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A.,  association of Baptist churches organized in 1907 as the Northern Baptist Convention, which became the American Baptist Convention in 1950 and took its present name in 1973. It grew out of Baptist associations and societies organized by Baptist churches in the United States in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Through the missionary activity of the Philadelphia Baptist Association, which was organized in 1707 by five Baptist churches in Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey, many other Baptist churches were organized. More associations of local churches were formed, and by 1800 about 48 such associations existed in the United States. In the 19th century the Baptists began cooperating in national organizations formed for specific purposes, mainly overseas missionary work. In 1824 the American Baptist Publication Society was organized and in 1832, the American Baptist Home Mission Society (since 1973 called the Board of National Ministries).
Disagreements between Southern and Northern Baptists over slavery led the Southern Baptists to form an independent organization in 1845, the Southern Baptist Convention. The mission and publication societies continued to operate independently in the North and West until they became part of the Northern Baptist Convention in 1907.
Generally considered more liberal than the Southern Baptist Convention, the American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A. is a member of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the U.S.A. and of the World Council of Churches. It has taken an active part in ecumenical affairs and has worked for closer union among the various Baptist groups.
In 1998 the denomination adopted an “American Baptist Identity Statement” that sought to summarize the Christian faith representative of American Baptists. This was amended in 2005 to include a statement about homosexuality. In 2006, 300 churches in the Southwest voted on whether or not to break from the mother church over the issue. Seceding congregations formed a new movement, Transformation Ministries. Those remaining within the denomination formed a new regional organization, American Baptist Congregations of the Southwest and Hawaii, in 2007.
The denomination meets annually and carries out its work through various divisions and societies. The basic units are the autonomous local churches, which are grouped into state conventions. In 2008 the American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A. claimed nearly 1.5 million members in about 5,800 congregations. Headquarters are in Valley Forge, Pa.
