American Red Cross,  U.S. humanitarian and disaster-relief organization, a national affiliate of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. In 1881, after observing the success of the International Red Cross in Europe, social reformer and nursing pioneer Clara Barton founded the American Red Cross to provide assistance for Americans suffering from disasters or serving on the battlefield. Barton served as the agency’s president until 1904. Under her leadership the Red Cross provided assistance during the Johnstown, Pennsylvania, flood of 1889 and the Galveston, Texas, tidal wave disaster of 1900. During the Spanish-American War (1898), it provided food and medicine to civilians and U.S. armed forces in Cuba.
Governance of the American Red Cross has traditionally been provided by a board of governors. The seven-member Cabinet Council serves as an advisory board. In the early 21st century, the American Red Cross had some 35,000 paid employees, who worked in 800 locally supported chapters. The organization also relied on nearly a million volunteers, who provided expert training and labour.
The Red Cross responds to tens of thousands of disasters each year, including fires, hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, hazardous materials spills, transportation accidents, and explosions. In the field, Red Cross workers provide shelter, food, physical and mental health services, financial assistance, transportation, medications, and tools. The Red Cross also serves as a liaison with government agencies and insurance agencies, and when all other avenues have been exhausted, the Red Cross provides long-term assistance. Through its affiliation with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent, the American Red Cross also travels internationally to provide disaster relief and establish development programs. For example, it provided help after a 2005 earthquake devastated parts of Pakistan and northern India. Other international projects have included immunization programs in Angola, Kenya, Sudan, and Bangladesh and a housing program in Sri Lanka.
In addition to providing disaster relief, the American Red Cross oversees the collection, testing, storage, and distribution of blood donations. Other services include community assistance to the economically disadvantaged, support for members of the military and their families, and health and safety education, such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), first aid, and lifeguarding classes.
The American Red Cross is supported entirely by donations and proceeds from Red Cross products. Approximately nine-tenths of the organizational budget is earmarked for humanitarian efforts. The American Red Cross also depends on practical support from a wide range of individuals and organizations and on its collaboration with other health organizations.
As with any other public health service organization, advocacy is part of the essential work of the American Red Cross in its mission to serve and protect the public. Therefore, it works with legislators and administrators at all levels of government to pursue the public interest. The advocacy function involves developing policy statements, testifying at hearings, generating position statements, and serving on external task forces and committees.
