Anna M. Richardson Harkness, née Anna M. Richardson,  (born Oct. 25, 1837, Dalton, Ohio, U.S.—died March 27, 1926, New York, N.Y.), American philanthropist, perhaps best remembered for establishing the Commonwealth Fund, which continues as a major foundation focusing largely on health services and medical education and research.
Anna Richardson married Stephen V. Harkness, a businessman, in 1854. In the 34 years of their marriage Stephen Harkness prospered greatly, having become an early and major investor in John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company. At his death in 1888 Anna Harkness and her three children were left with more than $150 million. In 1891 she moved to New York City, where her eldest son, Charles W. Harkness, established an office to manage the estate. She devoted herself to philanthropy, concentrating mainly on giving to churches and home and foreign missions. After Charles’s death in 1916 the scope of her philanthropy broadened.
In 1917 Anna Harkness gave $3 million to Yale University to build what became Harkness Quadrangle, named in memory of her son. A year later she established the Commonwealth Fund with an endowment of $20 million. The Commonwealth Fund, one of the major philanthropic foundations in the United States and one of the few established by a woman, gave its support over the years to medical schools, to the building of hospitals and clinics in rural areas, and to a program of fellowships to allow British students to study in the United States.
Harkness’s personal benefactions continued: in 1920 she gave another $3 million gift to Yale for faculty salaries, and in 1922 she gave a 22-acre (9-hectare) site valued at $4 million to Columbia University in New York City for a new medical centre for the College of Physicians and Surgeons and Presbyterian Hospital. She also gave liberally to the New York Public Library, the Museum of Natural History, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and other cultural and educational institutions. By the time of her death in 1926, Harkness had increased her original $50 million share of the estate to $85 million and had given away more than $40 million. Her will distributed the rest mainly to philanthropic institutions, including an additional $22 million to the Commonwealth Fund.
