Artaxerxes II,  (flourished late 5th and early 4th centuries bc), Achaemenid king of Persia (reigned 404–359/358).
He was the son and successor of Darius II and was surnamed (in Greek) Mnemon, meaning “the mindful.” When Artaxerxes took the Persian throne, the power of Athens had been broken in the Peloponnesian War (431–404), and the Greek towns across the Aegean Sea in Ionia were again subjects of the Achaemenid Empire. In 404, however, Artaxerxes lost Egypt, and in the following year his brother Cyrus the Younger began preparations for his rebellion. Although Cyrus was defeated and killed at Cunaxa (401), the rebellion had dangerous repercussions, for it not only demonstrated the superiority of the Greek hoplites used by Cyrus but also led the Greeks to believe that Persia was vulnerable.
In 400 Sparta broke openly with the Achaemenids, and during the next five years its armies achieved considerable military success in Anatolia. The Spartan navy, however, was destroyed at Cnidus (394), thereby giving the Achaemenids mastery of the Aegean. The Greek allies of Persia (Thebes, Athens, Argos, and Corinth) continued the war against Sparta, but, when it became evident that the only ones to gain from the war were the Athenians, Artaxerxes decided to conclude peace with Sparta. In 386 Athens was compelled to accept the settlement known as the King’s Peace, or the Peace of Antalcidas, by which Artaxerxes decreed that all the Asiatic mainland and Cyprus were his, that Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros were to remain Athenian dependencies, and that all the other Greek states were to receive autonomy.
Elsewhere Artaxerxes met with less success. Two expeditions against Egypt (385–383 and 374) ended in complete failure, and during the same period there were continuous rebellions in Anatolia. There were also wars against the mountain tribes of Armenia and Iran.
By the King’s Peace the Achaemenids had become the arbiters of Greece, and in the following wars all parties applied to them for a decision in their favour. After the Theban victory of Leuctra (371), an old alliance between the Achaemenids and the Thebans was restored. Achaemenid supremacy, however, was based on Greek internal discord rather than Achaemenid strength, and, when this weakness became apparent, all the satraps (governors) of Anatolia rose in revolt (c. 366), in alliance with Athens, Sparta, and Egypt, and Artaxerxes could do little against them. The satraps, however, were divided by mutual distrust, and the rebellion was finally put down by Persia through a series of treacheries. When the reign of Artaxerxes ended, Achaemenid authority had been restored over most of the empire—more from internal rivalries and discord than from his efforts.
Under Artaxerxes an important change occurred in the Persian religion. The Persians apparently did not worship images of the gods until Artaxerxes set up statues of the goddess Anāhitā in various large cities. Inscriptions by all former kings named only Ahura Mazdā, but those of Artaxerxes also invoked Anāhitā and Mithra, two deities of the old popular Iranian religion that had been neglected.
