Arthur F. Bentley, in full Arthur Fisher Bentley,  (born October 16, 1870, Freeport, Illinois, U.S.—died May 21, 1957, Paoli, Indiana), American political scientist and philosopher known for his work in epistemology, logic, and linguistics and for his contributions to the development of a behavioral methodology of political science.
Bentley received a B.A. in 1892 and a Ph.D. in 1895 from Johns Hopkins University and taught a seminar in sociology the following year at the University of Chicago. He then engaged in reporting and editorial work for the Times-Herald and Record-Herald of Chicago until 1910, when he retired to Paoli, Indiana, to manage his orchard and write. He was active in the Red Cross during World War I and was Indiana leader of the presidential campaign of Senator Robert M. La Follette of the Progressive Party in 1924.
In The Process of Government: A Study of Social Pressures (1908), his most noted work, Bentley attempted to develop a methodology of behavioral social-science research and urged concentration of study on overt human activity, the raw material of the political process. He arranged political data in terms of groups, interests, and pressures (a given activity might be viewed as the activity of a group, the expression of an interest, or the exertion of pressure). He did not attempt to formulate a general group theory and in his later work was prepared to consider the individual as the focal point of inquiry into the political process. Concerned more with methodology than with theory, he saw the study of manifest behaviour as the way to more profound understanding of human affairs. Together with the philosopher John Dewey, Bentley developed a “transactional” view of social explanation that went beyond the existing prescientific “self-action” and mechanistic “interaction” approaches and postulated knowledge as a social phenomenon.
In The Process of Government Bentley dealt with the social nature of language, in which all description and thought are to be found. Other works by Bentley include Relativity in Man and Society (1926), Linguistic Analysis of Mathematics (1932), Behavior, Knowledge, Fact (1935), Knowing and the Known (1949, with John Dewey), and Inquiry into Inquiries: Essays in Social Theory (1954).
