Baptist Federation of Canada,   cooperative agency for several Canadian Baptist groups, organized in 1944 in Saint John, N.B., by the United Baptist Convention of the Maritime Provinces, the Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec, and the Baptist Union of Western Canada.
Baptist churches were organized in the Maritime Provinces in the latter half of the 18th century, primarily by Baptists who were loyal to England and who left New England because of the American Revolution. In 1846 the Baptist Convention of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island was organized. The name was changed in 1879 to the Baptist Convention of the Maritime Provinces. In 1905–06 this group and Free Baptists in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia merged to form the United Baptist Convention of the Maritime Provinces. In the 1960s it was renamed the United Baptist Convention of the Atlantic Provinces.
A few Baptist churches were organized in Ontario in the late 18th century, but, in the 19th century, many congregations were started in Ontario and Quebec by Baptists from the United States, England, and Scotland. The Ottawa Baptist Association, including churches in Quebec and eastern Ontario, was organized in 1836. Subsequently, other associations and mission societies were formed in these provinces, but various controversies delayed the union of these groups until 1888, when the Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec was organized.
Baptist missionaries from Ontario began working in western Canada in the 1870s, and congregations and associations were organized. In 1897 the Baptist Convention of British Columbia was established, and in 1909 the more inclusive Baptist Union of Western Canada was organized.
As early as 1900, efforts were made to unite the three Baptist conventions in Canada, but agreement could not be reached for many years. The groups did cooperate, however, in home and foreign missions and in educational activities. From 1931 to 1943, an Inter-Conventions Committee worked out the details of union, which was completed in 1944. The federation acts as a coordinating agency and does not supplant the area conventions. 
