Bernard Arnault,  (born March 5, 1949, Roubaix, France), French businessman best known as the chairman and CEO of the French conglomerate LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA, the largest luxury-products company in the world.
Arnault graduated from the École Polytechnique in Paris with a degree in engineering. In 1971 he took control of his father’s construction firm Ferret-Savinel. Eight years later he changed the company’s name to Férinel Inc. and shifted its focus to real estate.
With $15 million of his own money, Arnault, together with Antoine Bernheim, a managing partner of the French bank Lazard Frères and Co., raised the $80 million necessary to purchase Boussac Saint-Frères, a bankrupt textile company that owned the fashion house of Christian Dior. Then, in 1987, Arnault was invited to invest in LVMH by the company’s chairman, Henri Racamier. Investing through a joint venture with Guinness PLC, Arnault ousted Racamier in 1990 and started to sweep a slew of fashion companies into the LVMH fold: Christian Lacroix, Givenchy, and Kenzo; the leather goods companies Loewe, Céline, and Berluti; the jeweler Fred Joailler; the DFS group (the world’s biggest duty-free chain); and the beauty retailer Sephora.
Arnault was known in Europe as the man who revitalized French couture in 1995 by appointing British fashion designer John Galliano to replace the venerable Hubert de Givenchy at the latter’s Paris fashion house. A year later the “Pope of Fashion,” as Arnault was dubbed by Women’s Wear Daily, moved Galliano to Christian Dior and appointed the brash British fashion designer Alexander McQueen to replace him at Givenchy. Arnault then hired Marc Jacobs, a young American designer, to the post of creative director at Louis Vuitton, a maker of luxury leather goods; that year, LVMH also acquired a majority stake in Jacobs’s eponymous line. Although all three designers eventually left their positions, Arnault’s fashion foresight had revived interest in these traditional fashion houses by the early 21st century.
Arnault continued to acquire luxury brands, including the Italian company Fendi (2003), the iconic French department store La Samaritaine (2010), Italian jewelry brand Bulgari (2011), and the classic American jeweler Tiffany & Co. (2021). He also built the Fondation Louis Vuitton (2014), a contemporary art museum in the Bois de Boulogne, Paris, designed by Canadian American architect Frank Gehry. In 2007 Arnault was named Commander of the Legion of Honour, one of France’s highest distinctions.
