Bertha Honoré Palmer, née Bertha Honoré,  (born May 22, 1849, Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.—died May 5, 1918, Osprey, Florida), American socialite remembered especially for her active contributions to women’s, artistic, and Chicago civic affairs.
Bertha Honoré in 1871 married Potter Palmer, a wealthy merchant who shortly afterward became identified with the Palmer House, one of the nation’s premier hotels. Her husband’s position automatically qualified Palmer for membership in Chicago’s social elite. Her own abilities, tact, charm, and high goals won her undisputed leadership.
In 1891 Palmer was named chairman of the Board of Lady Managers for the World’s Columbian Exposition to be held in Chicago two years later. Under her firm guidance the board created a highly effective female presence in the exposition. The Woman’s Building, designed by Sophia Hayden, featured exhibits from 47 nations, many of them obtained through Palmer’s personal acquaintance with political leaders and royalty. It was a highlight of the exposition and went far to demonstrate both the achievements of women around the world and the disabilities under which they yet laboured.
Palmer was a mainstay of Jane Addams’s Hull House settlement, to which she gave both liberal financial and personal support, and from 1892 to 1896 she was a trustee of Northwestern University. She became first vice president of the Chicago Civic Federation (forerunner of the National Civic Federation) on its organization in December 1893. In 1900 she was appointed by President William McKinley the only woman among the U.S. commissioners to the Paris Exposition.
Palmer was an art collector of note, and she was guided by Mary Cassatt to an early appreciation of the Impressionists. Her social sphere was extended to Newport, Rhode Island, in 1896, and the same qualities that had brought her to the fore in Chicago conquered Eastern prejudices against Midwestern and newer money. After her husband’s death in 1902, Palmer took over active management of his $8 million estate and more than doubled it in her remaining years. From 1910 she devoted much of her time to ranching and farming on her large estate in Florida.
