Big East Conference,  American collegiate athletic association that consists of Butler, Creighton, DePaul, Georgetown, Marquette, St. John’s, Seton Hall, Villanova, and Xavier universities and Providence College.
The conference was founded in 1979 by seven eastern institutions with notable men’s basketball programs: Georgetown, Syracuse University, Providence, Seton Hall, St. John’s, the University of Connecticut, and Boston College. Villanova joined the following year and the University of Pittsburgh in 1982. Big East schools that fielded division I-A (the top American collegiate football division at the time) football programs saw those teams compete as independents until 1991, when the conference added the University of Miami; Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey; Temple University; West Virginia University; and Virginia Tech. The latter four schools were competing only in football. The five new schools joined Syracuse, Pittsburgh, and Boston College to form the first Big East football conference. In 1995 Rutgers and West Virginia became full members and the University of Notre Dame joined in all sports other than football.
Virginia Tech became a full conference member in 2000, but in 2004 the school, along with Miami, departed to the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC). Temple also left the Big East that year, and Boston College left for the ACC in 2005. That year saw the Big East offset those losses by adding the University of Cincinnati, DePaul, the University of Louisville, Marquette, and the University of South Florida. Temple rejoined the conference in a football-only capacity in 2012 as West Virginia departed for the Big 12 Conference.
In 2013 the most radical realignment in conference history took place as Notre Dame, Pittsburgh, and Syracuse joined the ACC and the remaining football-playing schools created the American Athletic Conference. The Big East then became a non-football conference and added Butler, Creighton, and Xavier to offset the large loss of members.
