Catalan language, Catalan Català,  Romance language spoken in eastern and northeastern Spain—chiefly in Catalonia and Valencia—and in the Balearic Islands. It is also spoken in the Roussillon region of France, in Andorra (where it is the official language), and in the city of Alghero, Sardinia, Italy. Catalan is spoken by some 9,000,000 people in Spain and some 125,000 in France, as well as by some 30,000 in Andorra and some 40,000 in Alghero,
Linguistically, there are two main dialect groups in modern Catalan: the western dialects, including West Catalan and Valencian; and the eastern group, including East Catalan, Balearic, and Roussillonnais and the dialect spoken in Alghero, where Catalan was introduced in the 14th century. From the time of the Spanish Civil War, politically motivated disputes over the relationship of Valencian to Catalan were bitter. Because the two differ only in minor respects (details of pronunciation, vocabulary, and verb conjugation) and are easily mutually intelligible, most linguists and the Valencian Academy of Language regard Valencian and Catalan to be different names for the same language. Their minor differences are not usually reflected in the written language.
Catalan is most closely related to the Occitan language of southern France and to Spanish, but it is clearly distinct from both. It differs from Spanish in the following characteristics: a lack of rising diphthongs (such as ie and ue, as in compare Catalan be and Spanish bien “well,” Catalan bo and Spanish bueno “good”) and an abundance of falling diphthongs (such as eu, au, ou, as in compare Catalan peu and Spanish pie “foot,” Catalan bou and Spanish buey “ox”). Catalan also retains the sounds j (pronounced like French j or the z in English azure), z, tj (pronounced like English j), tz, and x (pronounced like English sh); none of those consonants occur in modern Spanish. Catalan stresses certain verbs on the root rather than on the infinitive ending, as in Spanish (Catalan VENdre, Spanish venDER “to sell”). Catalan differs from Occitan less than from Spanish but often uses different vowel sounds and diphthongs and also has somewhat different grammatical conventions.
Catalan in the early 21st century has lost little of its former lustre, even though it is no longer as widespread as it was between 1137 and 1749, as the official language of Aragon. Although there is no evidence of dialectalization in the Middle Ages, perhaps because of the standardizing influence of its official use in the kingdom of Aragon, since the 16th century the dialects of Valencia and the Balearic Islands, especially, have tended to differentiate from the Central (Barcelona) dialect. Nevertheless, some degree of uniformity is preserved in the literary language. With the administrative reorganization that started in the late 1970s, Catalonia became a comunidad autónoma (“autonomous community”), and Catalan once again gained ascendancy in eastern Spain.
The earliest surviving written materials in Catalan—a charter and six sermons—date from the 12th century, with poetry flourishing from the 13th century; before the 13th century, Catalan poets wrote in Provençal. The first true Catalan poet was Ramon Llull (1232/33–1315/16), and the greatest Catalan poet was Ausias March (1397–1459), a Valencian. The language retained its vigour until the union of the Aragonese and Castilian crowns in 1474 marked the beginning of its decline. After that, mainly grammatical works appeared; the language was to wait for its renaissance (Renaixença) until the late 19th century. In 1906 the first Catalan Language Congress attracted 3,000 participants, and in 1907 the Institut d’Estudis Catalans was founded. Yet not until 1944 was there a course in Catalan philology at the University of Barcelona; a chair of Catalan language and literature was founded there in 1961. In the late 20th century, as Catalonia achieved greater autonomy, Catalan was revived as the principal language of politics and education, as well as of public life in general, in Catalonia.
