Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association (CIAA), also called Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association (1912–50),  the oldest African American athletic conference in the United States. Originally named the Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association, the CIAA was formed in 1912 to link and regulate sports competitions between historically African American colleges and universities.
African American colleges began organizing athletic teams in the late 1800s. The first teams were informal and organized by students, but they soon became more structured and were run by black colleges and bureaucratic organizations. Spurred by segregation in collegiate athletics, the CIAA was formed to help organize athletic competitions between African American colleges and included teams from Howard University, Lincoln University, Hampton Institute (now Hampton University), Shaw University, and Virginia Union University. Most colleges in the CIAA offered football, one of the most popular sports, and many also offered basketball and baseball. Exceptional baseball players in the CIAA played with the professional Negro National and Eastern Colored Leagues while still in college, and some went on to careers in professional African American leagues after graduation.
Renamed the Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association in 1950, the CIAA was restricted by segregation, racism, and the inequality that existed in college sports and academic institutions. African American colleges had less money for athletic facilities, equipment, and coaching staffs than many primarily white colleges had. While Northern white colleges occasionally recruited exceptional African American players, competition between white and African American athletes was generally segregated. Additionally, though CIAA competitions and players were well known in African American communities, they received little attention in the white press.
Segregation in sports remained in some college athletic departments until the late 1970s and provoked particularly heated arguments in Southern leagues. Civil rights work in the 1950s and ’60s, along with the desire of white colleges to put together winning teams, helped drive the slow integration of college sports. The last white league to exclude African American college athletes, the Southeastern Conference League, began to integrate in 1967. The CIAA itself diversified by adding Chowan University in 2008, the first non-predominantly African American college in the conference’s history.
Today the CIAA consists of 12 universities with teams that participate in the National Collegiate Athletic Association’s Division II. Most of the CIAA’s sports are divided into Northern and Southern divisions, and the conference hosts 16 annual championships. Its most popular and largest event is the annual CIAA basketball tournament, which is both a sports competition and a social event with a loyal following of alumni and major sports figures.
