Civic engagement,  broad set of practices and attitudes of involvement in social and political life that converge to increase the health of a democratic society.
The concept of civic engagement has assumed increasing importance as a means to reverse the balkanization of individual interests and the rapid disintegration of communal life. Civic engagement has been applied in a variety of contexts, from business to community development. Its foundational assumption is that both intellectual and action-oriented involvement create social and political bonds in a community. Through the process of engagement, individuals see themselves as an integral part of a community where civic judgment is enhanced. It is a means to achieve democratic values of equality and responsiveness in policy making. It is also believed to increase “social capital”—the resources an individual or a group derives from relationships of mutual acquaintance, recognition, and cooperation.
Proponents of civic engagement accept the legitimacy of governing institutions but seek to use political and associational activities, both formal and informal, as conduits for promoting democratic health. Political engagement focuses on encouraging activities in public decisions, such as voting, testifying at public meetings, or volunteering for campaigns. Associational participation typically takes place in the social arena and encourages volunteering in nonprofit organizations or visiting an elderly neighbour. Increased engagement is assumed to push extreme interests to the periphery. The underlying assumption is that when citizens participate in meaningful ways, many problems can be preempted or solved before reaching an adversarial stage.
Increasing civic engagement is a daunting task with real constraints. For example, civic engagement requires time and resources, but modern society pulls individuals in conflicting directions. In addition, many communities lack the social and political institutions needed to structure engagement, such as dialogic forums or community meetings. An approach to engagement that relies disproportionately upon citizens possessing ample time and resources risks favouring certain members of society over others. This encourages the dominance of extreme interests, outcomes that civic engagement seeks to avoid.
Despite common agreement related to the importance of civic engagement, research on this concept remains ambiguous. This stems from the wide variance in definitions of civic engagement and its concomitant lack of indicators. For example, scholars and practitioners may not distinguish properly between contexts of participation where the common good may or may not be served. This also stems from a general trend among scholars and practitioners to focus on individuals’ social relationships at the expense of considering the wider impact of political institutions and processes.
