Civil Rights Congress (CRC),  civil rights organization founded in Detroit in 1946 by William Patterson, a civil rights attorney and a leader of the Communist Party USA. The organization’s membership was drawn mainly from working-class and unemployed African Americans and left-wing whites.
At its creation, the Civil Rights Congress had as its goal the “defense of the constitutional rights and civil liberties of the American people, including Communists and Negroes.” Patterson and its other early members intended the organization to fight discrimination with whatever weapons were available but particularly by legal means.
Among the greatest concerns of the Civil Rights Congress was the plight of blacks who had migrated by the thousands from the rural South to the major cities in the North during and after World War II. One of the organization’s main goals was to protect blacks from police brutality and injustice in the court system. In 1948, for example, the congress intervened in the case of the so-called Trenton Six, a group of six black men in Trenton, New Jersey, accused having murdered an elderly white shopkeeper. Although the men did not fit the descriptions of the killers given by witnesses, they were convicted and sentenced to death by an all-white jury. The Civil Rights Congress entered the case after the sentences were imposed and began a protest that drew national attention. In 1949 the New Jersey Supreme Court reversed the sentence and ordered a new trial; two of the six were found guilty, and the others were acquitted.
In addition to focusing on African Americans, the Civil Rights Congress was concerned with protecting any Americans who had been charged under the Smith Act, a federal law making it a criminal offense to call for the overthrow of the U.S. government or be an active member of any group or society that supported such a cause. The act was aimed at anarchists and at groups such as the Communist Party USA and the Socialist Workers’ Party.
The Civil Rights Congress continued to be involved in legal cases until 1956, when it was investigated by the federal Subversive Activities Control Board and labeled a communist front group. Faced with increasing federal scrutiny and possible actions against it, the organization was dissolved.
