Community organizing,  method of engaging and empowering people with the purpose  of increasing the influence of groups historically underrepresented in policies and decision making that affect their lives.
Community organizing is both a tactic to address specific problems and issues and a longer-term engagement and empowerment strategy. Longer-term objectives of community organizing are to develop the internal capabilities and to increase the decision-making power and influence of underrepresented groups.
Community organizing is often a place-based activity, used in low-income and minority neighbourhoods. It is also used among common interest-based “communities” of people, such as new immigrant groups, who have limited participation and influence in decision making that affects their lives.
In community organizing, members of communities are organized to act collectively on their shared interests. Saul Alinsky is commonly recognized as the founder of community organizing. Alinsky emerged as a community organizer in the second half of the 1930s. His thinking about organizing was strongly influenced by the militant labour movement in the United States emerging at the time. Alinsky’s approach emphasized democratic decision making, the development of indigenous leadership, the support of traditional community leaders, addressing people’s self-interest, use of conflict strategies, and fighting for specific and concrete results. In the late 1960s and the 1970s many liberals and liberal-leaning foundations embraced his method of community organizing as an alternative to the radical activism and rebellion occurring at the time in U.S. cities.
The focus of Alinsky-type organizing is on strengthening the internal ties among people sharing similar values and interests. Working mainly through established organizational networks, such as churches, these efforts mobilize residents for actions that confront powerful people and institutions in an effort to get them to act differently. In conflict organizing, strong internal community ties are thought to be sufficient to empower people and effect change. In practice, some conflict organizers explicitly reject developing associations with those in power, for fear of having group members coopted when they share responsibilities with people in advantaged positions.
An alternative approach to conflict-based community organizing is the consensus approach. Consensus organizing emerged in the last decade of the 20th century. In contrast to conflict organizing, consensus organizing pays attention to the development of strong and weak ties—namely, both the nurturing of internal cooperation among communities of interest and the creation of working relationships with those who have power and influence. The goal is to create new organizations and leaders that are more broadly rooted, with an emphasis on establishing new positive linkages to government and other decision-influencing institutions.
