Conformity,  the process whereby people change their beliefs, attitudes, actions, or perceptions to more closely match those held by groups to which they belong or want to belong or by groups whose approval they desire. Conformity has important social implications and continues to be actively researched.
Two lines of research have had a great impact on views of conformity. In one set of studies (1935), the Turkish-born social psychologist Muzafer Sherif demonstrated the power of social influence to change people’s perceptions of highly ambiguous stimuli. Sherif made use of the autokinetic effect, a perceptual illusion that occurs when people are asked to concentrate on a stationary point of light in a dark room. Under those circumstances, people perceive movement in the light. Some think it moves only a little; others think it moves a lot.
Sherif found that when groups of three people were brought together and asked to say out loud how far a light moved, their judgments gradually converged. In other words, they developed a group norm about the distance the light moved. And that norm had a lasting impact on participants’ perceptions. Conformity to the group norm was still evident a year later. Participants created a norm through mutual social influence, which then influenced their private responses.
In another series of experiments, the American psychologist Solomon Asch assembled groups of seven to nine people for a study on visual perception. The experimental task, which involved matching the length of a standard line against three comparison lines, was easy. Each group contained one naive participant who answered next to last. The remaining “members” were confederates of the experimenter and gave unanimously incorrect answers on 12 of 18 trials.
Asch found that conformity occurred even in a situation where the majority gave clearly erroneous answers. Participants’ responses agreed with the erroneous majority approximately one-third of the time, and 27 percent of participants conformed on at least eight trials. Control participants (who made judgments privately) gave incorrect answers less than 1 percent of the time. Although the level of conformity that Asch obtained may seem surprising, it is worth noting that participants’ responses were correct approximately two-thirds of the time, and 24 percent of participants never conformed.
Two categories of conformity have been distinguished: public agreement (compliance) and private agreement (acceptance). If conformity is defined as movement toward a group norm, then compliance refers to overt behavioral change in the direction of that norm, whereas acceptance refers to covert attitudinal or perceptual change. For example, if an individual initially refused to sign a petition advocating abortion rights, learned that a group advocated those rights, and then signed a petition favouring those rights, the person would be showing compliance. In contrast, if an individual privately believed that abortion should be outlawed, learned that a group advocated abortion rights, and then changed his private opinion about those rights, the person would be showing acceptance.
Several forms of nonconformity have been distinguished, but two of the most important are independence and anticonformity. Independence occurs when a person initially disagrees with a group and exhibits neither compliance nor acceptance after being exposed to group pressure. In other words, the person stands fast when faced with disagreement. In contrast, anticonformity occurs when a person initially disagrees with a group and moves even farther away from its position (at the public or private level) after being exposed to pressure. (Ironically, anticonformers are just as responsive to group pressure as conformers, but they manifest their susceptibility by moving away from the group.)
People conform to group pressure because they are dependent on the group for satisfying two important desires: the desire to have an accurate perception of reality and the desire to be accepted by other people.
People want to hold accurate beliefs about the world because such beliefs usually lead to rewarding outcomes. Some beliefs about the world can be verified by using objective tests; others cannot be verified by using objective standards and hence must be verified by using social tests, namely comparing one’s beliefs to those of other people whose judgment one respects. If those others agree with one’s beliefs, one gains confidence in them; if they disagree, one loses confidence. Because disagreement is disturbing, people are motivated to eliminate it, and one way to do so is to conform to group norms.
According to that analysis, people sometimes conform to groups because they are uncertain about the correctness of their beliefs and believe the group is more likely to be correct than they are. That kind of conformity reflects what the American researchers Morton Deutsch and Harold Gerard labeled informational influence. Informational influence generally produces private acceptance as well as public compliance. This is illustrated in Sherif’s work, which indicated that people judging an ambiguous stimulus exhibited both compliance (when they made judgments in others’ presence) and acceptance (when they later responded privately).
Because informational influence is based on insecurity about one’s beliefs, one would expect it to be more common when an individual feels dependent on others for information. Consistently with that assumption, people exhibit more conformity when they are working on ambiguous tasks than on unambiguous tasks. In addition, they conform more when they have doubts about their own task competence and when they think other group members are highly competent in the task.
