Congress of Racial Equality (CORE),  interracial American organization established by James Farmer in 1942 to improve race relations and end discriminatory policies through direct-action projects. Farmer had been working as the race-relations secretary for the American branch of the pacifist group Fellowship of Reconciliation (FOR) but resigned over a dispute in policy; he founded CORE as a vehicle for the nonviolent approach to combating racial prejudice that was inspired by Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi.
CORE’s activities began with a sit-in at a coffee shop in Chicago in 1942 for the purpose of protesting segregation in public settings. The event was one of the first such demonstrations in the United States and identified CORE as an influential force in the subsequent desegregation of public facilities in Northern cities. After Southern states ignored the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1946 decision regarding the unconstitutionality of segregated seating on interstate buses, CORE and FOR launched the first Freedom Ride, an interracial peaceful protest.
In the late 1950s CORE turned its attention to the South, challenging public segregation and launching voter registration drives for African Americans. It became one of the leading organizations of the civil rights movement in the early 1960s by organizing activist campaigns that tested segregation laws in the South. From this era, the Freedom Rides of 1961 and the Freedom Summer project of 1964 endure as CORE’s most memorable contribution to the civil rights struggle. The group’s efforts became all the more dramatic when its nonviolent demonstrations were met by vicious responses from whites. CORE volunteers were assaulted, teargassed, and jailed, and some demonstrators were killed. Farmer himself survived a Ku Klux Klan murder plot and once escaped Louisiana state troopers by hiding inside a coffin housed in a hearse. His leadership contributed to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Under the influence of Roy Innis, who became CORE’s national director in 1968, the organization’s political orientation began to change, moving in a direction that he characterized as “pragmatic” but that many others saw as increasingly conservative. Some accused Innis and CORE of being of overly sympathetic to the interests of big business; Farmer was critical of Innis’s centralization of control and of the organization’s failure to conduct annual conferences.
By the beginning of the 21st century, CORE’s program emphases included worker training and equal employment opportunity, crime victim assistance, and community-oriented crisis intervention. The organization maintains its headquarters in New York City.
