Consanguinity,  kinship characterized by the sharing of common ancestors. The word is derived from the Latin consanguineus, “of common blood,” which implied that Roman individuals were of the same father and thus shared in the right to his inheritance.
Kin are of two basic kinds: consanguineous (sharing common ancestors) and affinal (related by marriage). In some societies other pairs of individuals also treat each other as relatives—for example, the wives of a pair of brothers, relatives by adoption, and godparents who have special kinlike relationships (fictive kin). Consanguineous kinship is a universal type; it includes those with common ancestors and excludes individuals who lack ancestors in common.
In the modern sense, consanguinity is a genetic concept. From a strictly biological point of view, the term is inappropriate (as are the terms mixed blood and good blood), because the genetic contributions of ancestors are not passed on to their descendants as blood but through genes contained in the chromosomes located in cell nuclei. Chromosomes are composed of nucleic acids (DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid) and proteins. DNA is the constituent portion of the chromosome that carries genes, and it is coded in specific ways to produce and control protein synthesis, with parts of each parent’s genetic message transmitted to the offspring. From a genetic perspective, consanguinity influences the probabilities of specific combinations of genetic characteristics called genotypes. Consanguinity results in the inheritance, from common ancestors of both parents, of transmissible capacities to synthesize and control nucleic acids and proteins, the essential substances of all organisms.
Consanguineous relatives are defined within various degrees, according to the likelihood of their sharing genetic potentialities from common ancestors. Thus, pairs of brothers and sisters (siblings) all have the same ancestors, whereas pairs of first cousins who are not otherwise related share only one-half of their ancestors. A child inherits only about one-half of the coded information from each parent; hence, a pair of brothers or sisters have about half of their chromosomal constitution in common. (The doubt about the exact fraction is due to the chance element in its transmission during meiosis, the cell division that produces sperm and egg, each possessing a haploid number of chromosomes.)
Genetically the degree of consanguinity of siblings is the same as that between a parent and child, and both are termed consanguineous in the first degree. An aunt or uncle shares with a niece or nephew about half the chance of common inheritance of a pair of siblings; thus, aunts and uncles may be termed consanguineous kin of the second degree. Following this logic, first cousins who have one-eighth of their genes in common are referred to as consanguineous kin of the third degree.
A great-grandparent and great-grandchild are genetically related to the same degree as a pair of first cousins. The grandparent is, however, a lineal kinsman, whereas the cousin is collateral kin. In genetics the degree of consanguinity is the sole factor of significance, but in various communities social relationships also are important in discriminating between collateral and lineal types of relationship. Likewise, biological attributes such as age and birth order often influence social attitudes and behaviour. In fact, consanguineous kin of various degrees, and even nonconsanguineous kin, may be addressed by the same term and treated similarly by custom or law (the term uncle, for instance, may be applied to a granduncle or to the husband of an aunt).
A major application of data on consanguinity reflects the probability that two individuals of known degree of consanguinity to another individual will share the traits of that person. This probability depends on the mode of inheritance and the degree of penetrance or expressivity of the causative genes. The mode of inheritance may, for example, be dominant or recessive. A pair of genes occupying the same relative position in a set of two chromosomes in the cell nucleus (these genes are called alleles) can code for two alternative traits, such as greenness and yellowness in peas. Both alleles may encode only one trait, or each may specify a different trait. When the alleles differ, both the trait that is observed and its mode of inheritance are described as dominant. Conversely, if the trait is observed only when both alleles are identical, it is recessive. A third mode of inheritance is termed sex-linked. Genes for hemophilia, for example, are present in both males and females, but it is males who are much more commonly affected with the disease. The degree of penetrance is the frequency with which any trait or effect is shown in a group or population that has the gene corresponding to that trait. Expressivity is the variable degree to which a given trait manifests in an individual.
