Don Francisco, byname of Mario Luis Kreutzberger Blumenfeld,  (born December 28, 1940, Talca, Chile), Chilean television personality who hosted the popular variety show Sábado Gigante (“Giant Saturday”), one of the longest-running programs in television history.
Kreutzberger was born to German-Jewish parents who arrived in Latin America just prior to World War II. His mother, a classical singer, gave him singing lessons, and when he was a teenager he found some success onstage as an actor. It was during this time that he formulated the character of Don Francisco, a funny emcee with a somewhat lecherous personality.
Though he was sent by his father to New York City in 1959 to study tailoring, Kreutzberger became enamoured of television there. Upon returning to Chile, he spent a year learning the technical aspects of television at the Catholic University of Chile in Santiago. He launched Show Domingal (“Sunday’s Show”; later renamed Sábado Gigante and moved to Saturday) in Santiago  in 1962, the year that television came to Chile. Originally eight hours long, the program was a cazuela (“stew”)—a mix of music, dance, comedy, travelogue, games, news, and interviews. (Later the show was reduced to a three-hour format).
Kreutzberger proved to be skilled in avoiding political influences in his programming. In 1973, when military leader Augusto Pinochet overthrew Chilean Pres. Salvador Allende, Kreutzberger convinced authorities that his comic character should not announce Pinochet’s proclamation to create a military junta on nationwide television. In 1986 the production of Sábado was moved to Miami, and the show was tailored to the Hispanic immigrant community in North America. Nonetheless, the program was not limited to the United States: it was shown in dozens of countries via the Spanish-language cable television network Univision. After 53 years on the air, Sábado ended in September 2015.
In 2016 Kreutzberger signed with Telemundo, and his first show with the channel, Don Francisco Te Invita (“Don Francisco Invites You”), began airing later that year. However, it was canceled in 2018.
Throughout his career, Kreutzberger was active in charitable work. In 1978 he began the telethon Logremos un Milagro (“We Will Achieve a Miracle”) to raise money to construct hospitals for Chilean children with disabilities. By the end of 2000, the telethon had benefited children in several other countries as well. He also led a campaign to help Florida rebuild after Hurricane Andrew (1992). As national vice president of the Muscular Dystrophy Association, he spearheaded its 2001 outreach to Hispanic Americans.
For a number of years, while continuing to host Sábado, Kreutzberger hosted a more serious weekly talk show, Don Francisco Presenta (“Don Francisco Presents”). He also hosted the Chilean versions of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? and Deal or No Deal. In his autobiography, Don Francisco entre la espada y la TV (2001; Don Francisco: Life, Camera, Action! [2002]), he described the anti-Semitism he encountered while growing up in Chile, where the book became a best seller. In 2001 Kreutzberger was recognized with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
In June 2005 Kreutzberger created a documentary film, Testigos del silencio (“Witnesses of Silence”), about Holocaust survivors—including his father, who served in a prison camp before the start of the war—and their families. It later aired at international film festivals.
