Dorothy Leib Harrison Wood Eustis, née Dorothy Leib Harrison,  (born May 30, 1886, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.—died Sept. 8, 1946, New York, N.Y.),  American philanthropist and dog breeder whose work with German shepherds led her to establish and endow The Seeing Eye, Inc., and other groups for the training of guide dogs and their blind owners.
Dorothy Harrison in 1906 married Walter A. Wood, a businessman who operated an experimental farm for the selective breeding of dairy cattle. The remarkable intelligence and loyalty of her German shepherd dog, Hans, further stimulated her thinking about practical genetics. In 1917, two years after her husband’s death, she moved to Radnor, Pennsylvania, and in 1921 she moved to Vevey, Switzerland, where she established a kennel and began experimenting in the selective breeding of dogs.
In 1923 Wood married George M. Eustis, who joined in her enthusiasm, as did Elliott S. Humphrey, an American horse breeder and trainer. Gradually they evolved a strain of German shepherd of great intelligence and loyalty and excellent disposition. Dogs from the Fortunate Fields kennel were soon earning great respect for work with the Swiss army and with various city police units throughout Europe.
In 1927 the Eustises learned of a school in Germany that trained dogs as guides for blind veterans. Dorothy Eustis’s article on the school for the Saturday Evening Post entitled “The Seeing Eye” (1927) brought an inquiry from Morris S. Frank, a blind man of Nashville, Tennessee. Frank traveled to Switzerland early in 1928 to receive Buddy, a specially trained guide dog from Eustis’s kennels, and to learn how to work with it. When he returned to Nashville, he and Buddy received wide publicity, which prompted yet more inquiries from blind persons. In 1929 Eustis returned to the United States, incorporated The Seeing Eye, Inc., and established a training school for dogs and owners in Nashville. The school settled permanently in Whippany, New Jersey, in 1932.
Eustis remained president of The Seeing Eye until 1940; from 1929 to 1933 she was also president of L’Oeil Qui Voit, a Swiss training school for dogs and instructors. Much of her own fortune went into The Seeing Eye, and no outside fund-raising was required after 1958. From the outset she restricted the sale of her guide dogs to persons of sufficient maturity, strength, ambition, and financial means to benefit fully from the freedom that a guide dog made possible. By the time of Eustis’s death in 1946, The Seeing Eye had supplied more than 1,300 guide dogs to the blind.
