Edith Abbott,  (born Sept. 26, 1876, Grand Island, Neb., U.S.—died July 28, 1957, Grand Island), American social worker, educator, and author who was instrumental in promoting the professional practice and academic discipline of social work in the United States.
Edith Abbott was the older sister of Grace Abbott, who would serve as chief of the United States Children’s Bureau from 1921 to 1934. Both sisters were influenced by their mother’s concern for the downtrodden, her pacifism, and her belief in equal rights for women. Edith graduated in 1893 from Brownell Hall, a girls’ boarding school in Omaha, but when the family could not afford to send her to college, she began teaching high school in Grand Island. Determined to get a college education nonetheless, she took correspondence courses and attended summer sessions until she was able to afford full-time matriculation at the University of Nebraska, which awarded her a degree in 1901. After an additional two years as a teacher, Abbott attended the University of Chicago in economics (Ph.D., 1905).
In 1906, the recipient of a Carnegie fellowship, Abbott continued her studies in England, at University College, London, and the London School of Economics and Political Science. There her ideas were much affected by those of social reformers Sidney and Beatrice Webb, who advocated new approaches to the problem of poverty. The following year Abbott returned to the United States and taught economics for a year at Wellesley College in Massachusetts. Academia, however, seemed too remote from the problems of the poor, and Edith soon moved to Chicago to join her sister at Jane Addams’s Hull House. Among other social reforms the sisters promoted while at Hull House were woman suffrage, the improvement of housing for the poor, and progressive legislation to protect immigrants, working women, and children. As assistant to Sophonisba Breckinridge, then director of social research at the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy, Abbott also collaborated on studies of juvenile delinquents and truants. On her own, she also produced studies on women in industry and problems in the penal system. Abbott’s work, which eventually would amount to more than 100 books and articles on a variety of topics, later earned her the sobriquet “passionate statistician.”
In 1920 Abbott and Breckinridge helped arrange the transfer of the School of Civics and Philanthropy to the University of Chicago, where, renamed the School of Social Service Administration, it became the first university-based graduate school of social work. Abbott became the school’s dean in 1924, a post she held until 1942. Until her retirement 11 years later, Abbott continued to teach and to edit the Social Service Review, a professional journal she had cofounded with Breckinridge in 1927. Abbott spent her last years with her brother Arthur in the family home in Grand Island.
