Edward Bernays, in full Edward L. Bernays,  (born November 22, 1891, Vienna, Austria—died March 9, 1995, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.), pioneer American publicist who is generally considered to have been the first to develop the idea of the professional public relations counselor—i.e., one who draws on the social sciences in order to motivate and shape the response of a general or particular audience.
Bernays was a year old when his parents moved to New York City from Austria, where his uncle, the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud, was beginning his work. His mother was Freud’s sister, Anna, and his father was a successful grain merchant. After graduating from high school at age 16, Bernays attended Cornell University, where, to placate his father, he earned a degree in agriculture in 1912. He abandoned farm products after a brief obligatory sally into the grain market and found work editing a medical review. This brought to his attention a play, Damaged Goods, whose would-be producer found popular taboos against the subject—venereal disease—insuperable. Bernays organized a scheme to muster endorsements of the play by civic leaders, and, as a result, the play was produced successfully and Bernays found his true calling.
After World War I, Bernays and Doris Fleischman (1891–1980), whom he later married, opened their own public relations office. Their first clients included the U.S. War Department, which wanted to persuade businesses to hire returning war veterans, and the Lithuanian government, which was lobbying for recognition by the United States. For one client, Venida hairnets, Bernays publicized the danger of women workers’ wearing long, loose hair in factories and restaurants. As a result, several U.S. states passed laws requiring factory workers and female food-service employees to wear hairnets. He organized soap-carving competitions for the Ivory soap of his client Procter & Gamble.
A vigorous spokesman and advocate for public relations into his 90s, Bernays was the author of many books, among the most influential of which were Crystallizing Public Opinion (1923), Propaganda (1928), and Public Relations (1952). He edited The Engineering of Consent (1955), the title of which is his oft-quoted definition of public relations. See marketing.
