Edward Sapir,  (born January 26, 1884, Lauenburg, Pomerania, Germany [now Lębork, Poland]—died  February 4, 1939, New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.), one of the foremost American linguists and anthropologists of his time, most widely known for his contributions to the study of North American Indian languages. A founder of ethnolinguistics, which considers the relationship of culture to language, he was also a principal developer of the American (descriptive) school of structural linguistics.
Sapir, the son of an Orthodox Jewish rabbi, was taken to the United States at age five. As a graduate student at Columbia University, he came under the influence of the noted anthropologist Franz Boas, who directed his attention to the rich possibilities of linguistic anthropology. For about six years he studied the languages of the Yana, Paiute, and others in the western United States.
From 1910 to 1925 Sapir served as chief of anthropology for the Canadian National Museum, Ottawa, where he made a steady contribution to ethnology. One of his more important monographs concerned cultural change among American Indians (1916). He also devoted attention to Indian languages west of the continental divide. He joined the faculty of the University of Chicago in 1925 and in 1929 suggested that the vast number of Indian languages of the United States and Canada and certain of those of Mexico and Central America could be classified in six major divisions. In 1931 he accepted a professorship at Yale University, where he established the department of anthropology and remained active until two years before his death.
Sapir suggested that man perceives the world principally through language. He wrote many articles on the relationship of language to culture. A thorough description of a linguistic structure and its function in speech might, he wrote in 1931, provide insight into man’s perceptive and cognitive faculties and help explain the diverse behaviour among peoples of different cultural backgrounds. He also did considerable research in comparative and historical linguistics. A poet, an essayist, and a composer, as well as a brilliant scholar, Sapir wrote in a crisp and lucid fashion that earned him considerable literary repute.
His publications included Language (1921), which was most influential, and a collection of essays, Selected Writings of Edward Sapir in Language, Culture, and Personality (1949).
