Elihu Katz,  (born May 31, 1926, New York City, New York, U.S.), American sociologist who significantly contributed to the study of mass communication. Some of his most notable work includes research on such topics as the intersection of mass and interpersonal communication, uses and gratifications, and media effects.
Katz attended Columbia University, New York City, where he studied sociology and earned a B.A. (1948), an M.A. (1950), and a Ph.D. (1956). While there he worked alongside his mentor, Paul Lazarsfeld, to write Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications (1955). This book has been widely cited as an influential work in the two-step flow model of communication, which suggests that information first flows from mass media channels to “opinion leaders,” who then wield their interpersonal influence on less-active members of the population.
Katz next turned his attention to helping the government of Israel introduce broadcast television in the 1960s, authoring numerous reports about television and its effects on everyday Israeli life. In the 1970s he worked with Manchester University in England to help introduce broadcast television to developing countries. Katz and Jay G. Blumler played a major role in the research of uses and gratifications as editors of The Uses of Mass Communication: Current Perspectives on Gratifications Research (1974). Within this compilation, Katz, Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch presented an oft-cited definition of uses and gratifications that underscores the importance of social and psychological needs and individual differences, which in turn determine media consumption and exposure.
Stirred by Anwar el-Sādāt’s peace initiative in the late 1970s, Katz began to record and subsequently research the historic broadcasts that covered the development of the Camp David Accords (1978) and the 1979 peace treaty between Israel and Egypt. Katz also extensively studied television and its impact on culture, namely public opinion and morale during the Six-Day War as well as the cross-cultural meaning of the primetime drama series Dallas. Many of his works also engaged with theorists such as Gabriel Tarde and Marshall McLuhan.
During his career, Katz served as Trustee Professor at the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania, emeritus professor of sociology and communication at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, distinguished visiting scholar at the University of Southern California, associate professor at the University of Chicago, visiting professor at Columbia University, and scientific director of the Guttman Institute of Applied Social Research in Israel. He was awarded honorary degrees from the Universities of Ghent, Haifa, Montreal, and Paris and received many international awards.
