Eliza Emily Chappell Porter, née Eliza Emily Chappell,  (born November 5, 1807, Geneseo, New York, U.S.—died January 1, 1888, Santa Barbara, California), American educator and welfare worker, remembered especially for the numerous schools she helped establish in almost every region of the United States.
Eliza Chappell began teaching school at age 16, and after moving with her mother to Rochester, New York, in 1828 she opened a school for small children. In 1831 she traveled to the frontier settlement on Mackinac Island (now part of Michigan) as a private tutor, and within a short time she had opened a school for mixed-race Indian children. After a trip east to recover from an illness and to secure support for the founding of more schools in the Northwest, she established schools at St. Ignace, Michigan (1833), and the small settlement of Chicago. In 1835 she married the Reverend Jeremiah Porter. Some years later she became director of the Chicago Sanitary Commission (1861–62 and briefly in 1863; later the Northwestern Sanitary Commission), organized to solicit, collect, and distribute food, medical supplies, and other provisions for use by the Union army and in military hospitals.
Porter abandoned office work for field service in 1862. She escorted a group of women volunteers to Cairo, Illinois, and there and in nearby Mound City she helped organize hospitals and direct the work of caring for the large number of casualties from the Battle of Shiloh (Pittsburg Landing). After recruiting more volunteer nurses, she assisted in hospitals in Savannah, Georgia, and in Memphis, Tennessee, and in the latter city she also established a school for African American children. She then visited and distributed supplies to several hospitals before joining “Mother” Mary Ann Bickerdyke in Chattanooga, Tennessee, to care for the Union soldiers wounded in General W.T. Sherman’s march to Atlanta, Georgia. Porter and the rough-hewn Mother Bickerdyke made an effective team. Throughout the Civil War and afterward, Porter was involved with hospital inspection. When she and her husband moved to Brownsville, Texas, in 1868, Porter reopened the coeducational Rio Grande Seminary that she had founded on an earlier visit. Over the next 15 years she conducted schools there, at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, and at Fort D.A. Russell, Wyoming, as her husband, then an army chaplain, was transferred.
