Elsie Clews Parsons, née Elsie Worthington Clews,  (born November 27, 1875, New York, New York, U.S.—died December 19, 1941, New York City), American sociologist and anthropologist whose studies of the Pueblo and other Native American peoples of the southwestern United States remain standard references.
Elsie Clews attended private schools and graduated from Barnard College (1896). She then studied history and sociology at Columbia University (M.A., 1897; Ph.D., 1899) and was appointed a Hartley House fellow at Barnard. In 1900 she married Herbert Parsons, a New York attorney and politician. From 1902 she was a lecturer in sociology at Barnard, but with her husband’s election to Congress in 1905 she resigned and accompanied him to Washington, D.C. Her first book, The Family, was published the following year; a textbook and a feminist tract founded on sociological research and analysis, it contained a lengthy discussion of trial marriage, which generated some notoriety and helped it to enjoy a large sale. To avoid further embarrassing her husband in his political career, Parsons used the pseudonym “John Main” for her next two books, Religious Chastity (1913) and The Old Fashioned Woman (1913), the latter of which is a sharp and witty analysis of the genesis of traditional sex roles and behaviour and the cultural codes that sustain them. Fear and Conventionality (1914), Social Freedom (1915), and Social Rule (1916) appeared under her own name.
On a trip to the Southwest in 1915, Parsons met the anthropologists Franz Boas and Pliny E. Goddard, who interested her in their work among Native Americans of the region. After further studies with Boas at Columbia, she embarked on a 25-year career of field research and writing that established her as perhaps the leading authority on the Pueblo and on other tribes in North America, Mexico, and South America. Aware of the need for exactness and detail, she collected a vast amount of data that led to useful and influential syntheses of knowledge, culminating in Pueblo Indian Religion, 2 vol. (1939). Her interest in all possible influences on Pueblo peoples led her to investigations among Native Americans of the Great Plains and of Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, and the Caribbean. The Zapotec Indians of the state of Oaxaca, in Mexico, are the subject of her widely acclaimed work Mitla: Town of the Souls (1936). The results of her Andean researches were published in Peguche, Canton of Otavalo (1945).
Parsons also published a number of works on West Indian and African American folklore, including Folk-Tales of Andros Island, Bahamas (1918); Folk-Lore from the Cape Verde Islands (1923), gathered from black Cape Verdeans in Massachusetts; Folk-Lore of the Sea Islands, South Carolina (1923), dealing with the area’s Gullah-speaking people; and Folk-Lore of the Antilles, French and English, 3 vol. (1933–43).
From 1918 Parsons was associate editor of the Journal of American Folklore. Her only teaching post in later years was a lectureship in 1919 at the newly opened New School for Social Research, where one of her students was Ruth F. Benedict. She was the first woman to be elected president of the American Anthropological Association, but she did not live to deliver her inaugural address, which dealt with the abuse of anthropology to further racist schemes.
