Eskimo-Aleut languages,  family of languages spoken in Greenland, Canada, Alaska (United States), and eastern Siberia (Russia), by the Eskimo and Aleut peoples. Aleut is a single language with two surviving dialects. Eskimo consists of two divisions: Yupik, spoken in Siberia and southwestern Alaska, and Inuit, spoken in northern Alaska, Canada, and Greenland. Each division includes several dialects. The proposed relationship of Eskimo-Aleut with other language families, such as Chukotko-Kamchatkan, Uralic, and/or Indo-European, remains conjectural.
Eskimo is a blanket term for Inuit and Yupik, the two mutually unintelligible main divisions of the Eskimo languages. The name Aleut, used by Russian fur traders from the Kamchatka Peninsula in 1745, refers primarily to the people of the Aleutian Islands, who call themselves Unangan or (in the dialect of Atka) Unangas, but also by extension to the Pacific Yupiks, who call themselves Alutiit (plural of Alutiiq), an adaptation of the Russian name.
Inuit, which means “the people” or “the real people,” is used as a name for the language spoken in Greenland, Arctic Canada, and northern Alaska, U.S., west to the Bering Strait and south to Norton Sound. It is a dialect continuum, in which neighbouring dialects are mutually intelligible but the cumulative differences impede or prevent understanding between groups that are some distance apart. This distinctiveness can be seen in the variety of language names; the Inuit language of Greenland is called Kalaallisut (literally “in the Greenlandic way”), that of eastern Canada Inuktitut, that of western Canada Inuktitun (literally “in the Inuit way”), and that of North Alaska Inupiaq (literally “real person”).
Yupik, a dialectal form meaning “real person,” includes five languages: Central Alaskan Yupik, spoken southward from Norton Sound; Pacific Yupik, commonly called Alutiiq, spoken from the Alaska Peninsula eastward to Prince William Sound; Naukanski Siberian Yupik, whose speakers were resettled southward from Cape Dezhnyov, the easternmost point of the Eurasian landmass; Central Siberian Yupik (mainly Chaplinski), which is spoken in the Chukchi Peninsula and on St. Lawrence Island, Alaska; and the very divergent Sirenikski, now virtually extinct.
The Aleut language survives in two mutually intelligible dialects: Eastern Aleut, spoken mostly by middle-aged and older people living in eight villages from the Alaska Peninsula westward through Umnak Island, Aleutian Islands, and in the Pribilof Islands in the Bering Sea, which were settled beginning in 1800; and Atkan Aleut, which is spoken also by young people (but no children) on Atka Island, Aleutian Islands, and by some old people on Bering Island, Komandor Islands, Russia, settled in 1826. Attu, once the westernmost Aleut dialect in Alaska, is now extinct in Alaska, but Attuan Aleut survives on Bering Island in a creolized form (Russian Aleut), with Russian verbal inflections.
Eskimo and Aleut have relatively simple systems of distinctive sounds. The accent (stress) depends upon the length or the number of the syllables and never has independent value as in English.
All the languages have the three vowels usually written a, i, and u, whose pronunciation is determined by the consonants that follow or precede them. They occur both in short and simple form and combined into long vowels; in Inuit and Alaskan Yupik vowels also may be combined into diphthongs. Yupik has an additional short e, which sounds like the e in roses or taxes. In Inuit this sound has become identical with the vowel written i. In Aleut it has become identical with a, i, or u, or it has been dropped from the language.
Of distinctive consonants, the Eskimo languages have from 13 to 27, depending on the dialect. The stop sounds include the labial p, the dental t (made with the tip of the tongue touching the back of the upper teeth), the velar k, and the uvular q (made with stoppage of the airstream by contact of the back of the tongue and the uvula or back velum); in Alaskan Yupik there is also a palatal c (like English ch), to which an s corresponds in the other dialects. In parts of Canada this has changed to h. The nasal sounds, made with the breath passing through the nose, include m, n, and ŋ (as in “sing”), and, in Yupik, also voiceless nasals (i.e., nasal sounds made without vocal cord vibration). Voiced and voiceless varieties of the continuant consonants v, l, g, and the uvular r—which is written in Inupiaq and Siberian Yupik with a modified g—are distinctive sounds in the western dialects but in eastern Inuit they are only variants. In addition to y (written in Canada and Greenland as j), some dialects have sounds similar to English r or z or to sh (in Greenlandic written s). Corresponding to these, Aleut has a fricative d (pronounced as the th in that); e.g., Aleut da- “eye” is related to Yupik ii and iya, Inuit iri, izi, and iji, Greenlandic isi (pronounced ishi). Aleut shares with Eskimo most of the consonants articulated with the tongue, including the uvular q, ĝ, and x̂ and the ch and s, but it has p and labial fricatives (f and v) only in loanwords from Russian or English. Aleut m corresponds with Eskimo m and v; to Eskimo p corresponds the Aleut h (in initial position) and the Aleut aspirated nasal sound hm (pronounced with an accompanying puff of air)—e.g., Aleut hum- “to swell” corresponds to Yupik puve-; Aleut ahmat- “to ask” is cognate with Yupik apete-.
In initial position, Eskimo uses only a single consonant; between vowels at most two. In contrast, Aleut has initial consonant clusters, resulting from the loss of a vowel in the first syllable from an older historical form—e.g., Aleut sla- “weather,” Inuit sila.
