Evangelical Alliance,  also called World’s Evangelical Alliance,  British-based association of Christian churches,  societies, and individuals  that is active in evangelical work. It was organized in London in 1846 at an international conference of Protestant religious leaders after preliminary meetings had been held  by Anglican and other British churchmen in reaction against the Oxford Movement in the Church of England, which emphasized the Roman Catholic heritage of that church. It was decided to form an international association of Protestant churches that would confront the encroachments of Catholicism and uphold the religious liberty and evangelical activities of reformed churches worldwide. Some 800 delegates from 50 denominations in Europe and America attended the 1846 founding convention, and international conventions were subsequently held every few years. Branches were formed in several countries, although the Alliance was always most active in Great Britain. The American branch, organized in 1867, was superseded in 1908 by the Federal Council of Churches, which it had helped establish. In the 19th century the Alliance was actively concerned with the furtherance of Christian liberty and religious toleration. It was successful in lessening the persecution of individual Christians in many parts of the world.
The more than 70 member missions (denominational, interdenominational, and undenominational) of the Evangelical Alliance enjoy complete autonomy but subscribe to a common doctrinal basis. The doctrine of the Alliance is contained in the nine articles adopted in London in 1846: the divine inspiration, authority, and sufficiency of the Scriptures; the right and duty of private judgment in the interpretation of them; the unity of the Godhead and the Trinity of Persons; the utter depravity of human nature; the incarnation of the Son of God and his atonement for the sins of all men; the justification of sinners by faith alone; the work of the Holy Spirit as sanctifier; the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, and the final judgment by Jesus Christ; and the divine institution of the Christian ministry. The founding convention also established the universal week of prayer, observed the first full week of January.
The Alliance’s size and influence  declined throughout much of  the 20th century, but it  continued its activities in Great Britain and  played an active part in various nationwide evangelistic campaigns. In 1951 the Alliance and the U.S.-based National Association of Evangelicals helped establish the World Evangelical Fellowship, a worldwide association of evangelical organizations. In 1958 the Alliance helped organize the Evangelical Missionary Alliance, “to provide a medium of fellowship and effective cooperation in the interest of evangelical missionary work and service overseas.”
After it was revitalized under new leadership in the 1980s, the Evangelical Alliance regained prominence as the principal umbrella organization for evangelicals in the United Kingdom. In association with kindred societies, the Alliance seeks to emphasize the reformed character of the Church of England and to encourage the church’s unity and its evangelical tendencies. The Alliance publishes the  magazine IDEA. The headquarters of the Evangelical Alliance are in London.
