Extended family,  an expansion of the nuclear family (parents and dependent children), usually built around a unilineal descent group (i.e., a group in which descent through either the female or the male line is emphasized). The extended family system often, but not exclusively, occurs in regions in which economic conditions make it difficult for the nuclear family to achieve self-sufficiency. Cooperation being necessary, aid is recruited, usually either from the patrilineal kin or the matrilineal kin. In traditional China, for example, the extended family ideally consisted of the nuclear family of the head of the household, his unmarried daughters, his sons and their families, his sons’ sons’ families and unmarried daughters, and so forth. The extended family may include more distant kin, but the uncles, aunts, or cousins usually belong to the same clan as members of the core lineage.
The relationships between members of the extended family are such that the form of address a person employs consists of an extension of nuclear family terms to a wider circle of relatives within the resident clan. In a matrilineal family, for example, a person might refer to his maternal uncle as “father” and to the latter’s children as “brothers” and “sisters.” The extended family does not necessarily live in the same dwelling, but normally the members live close together and work in teams.
It is common for the senior kin to assume the role of mate selection for those of marriageable age, who are considered too inexperienced to make a proper choice. Qualities sought in a spouse by the interested kin in an extended family include work ability, capacity to adapt, procreative power, status, and financial worth.
In common usage, the term extended family has been given a variety of meanings. It may, for example, refer to a household that includes other kin in addition to the members of the nuclear family (known in anthropological terminology as a conjugal family), or it may be loosely applied to mean all living consanguineal kin. Compare nuclear family.
