Ferdinand Tönnies, in full Ferdinand Julius Tönnies,  (born July 26, 1855, near Oldenswort, Schleswig—died  April 9, 1936, Kiel, Germany), German sociologist whose theory reconciled the organic and social-contract conceptions of society.
A teacher at the University of Kiel from 1881, Tönnies was best known for Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (1887; Community and Society, 1957). He was well known in Great Britain for his English-language editions of writings by the 17th-century philosopher Thomas Hobbes. Tönnies’ conception of will was central to his sociological theory. He identified Wesenwille (natural will), which involves a judgment of the intrinsic value of an act rather than its practicality and which varies in degree of rationality, and Kürwille (rational will), which is a conscious choice of means to a specific end. In his view, Wesenwille is manifested in Gemeinschaft (community), which is maintained by traditional rules and a universal sense of solidarity and which fits the organic theory of social union. Gemeinschaft tends to change into the Kürwille-based Gesellschaft (society), in which rational self-interest is the stronger element. Gesellschaft must be held together by deliberately formulated prescriptions and may be explained in terms of the social-contract theory. In practice, all societies show elements of both kinds of will, because man’s conduct is neither wholly instinctive nor wholly reasoned.
Although Tönnies disavowed totalitarianism (including Nazism in his own country) and found some degree of voluntarism in all social relationships, he believed that every social organization has a collective will, presenting aspects of both Wesenwille and Kürwille. He dealt with this subject in Die Sitte (1909; Custom, 1961) and Kritik der öffentlichen Meinung (1922; “Critique of Public Opinion”). To him, the “public opinion” of a total society expresses the communal will that certain social and political actions be performed or abstained from and implies the use of sanctions against dissidents.
In 1889 Tönnies, who in part owed his notion of Kürwille to Thomas Hobbes, produced English editions of Hobbes’s Behemoth and Elements of Law, Natural and Politic; both were reissued in 1928. He also wrote Thomas Hobbes Leben und Lehre (1896; “Thomas Hobbes’s Life and Doctrine”).
