Fernando Ortiz,  (born July 16, 1881, Havana, Cuba—died April 10, 1969, Havana), anthropologist, essayist, and philologist who pioneered in the study of neo-African cultures in the Americas, particularly in Cuba.
Ortiz began his career as a lawyer and criminologist (he was among the first to advocate the use of fingerprinting in police work). His study of black criminals in Havana led him to research their urban subculture and eventually their religious beliefs and practices. The experience changed his life and started him in a new career. In 1906 he published Los negros brujos (“Black Sorcerers”), his first book on the subject, and in 1916 Los negros esclavos (“Black Slaves”), in which he studies Cuban blacks according to the region of Africa from which they came. His Un catauro de cubanismos (1923; “A Load of Cubanisms”) identifies the African origins of many words used in Cuba, as well as the different origins of other words. Ortiz followed this with the Glosario de Afronegrismos, estudio de lingüística, lexicología, etimología y semántica (1924; “A Glossary of Africanisms: A Study of Linguistics, Lexicology, Etymology, and Semantics”).
Ortiz’s work was influential in the emergence of the Afro-Cuban movement, a trend in the arts—particularly in music, dance, and literature—that incorporated and celebrated the African component of Cuban culture.
In 1940 Ortiz published what would become his most famous book, Contrapunteo cubano del tabaco y el azúcar (Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar), an interpretation of the island’s culture through its two principal products, and in the 1950s he contributed two more decisive volumes: La africanía de la música folklórica de Cuba (1950; “The Africanness of Folkloric Cuban Music”) and Los bailes y el teatro de los negros en el folklore de Cuba (1951; “The Dances and Theatre of Blacks in Cuban Folklore”).
Throughout his life Ortiz was involved in the foundation of institutions and journals dedicated to the study of Cuban culture. He was the cofounder of the Cuban Academy of the Language in 1926 and of Surco (founded 1930) and Ultra (1936–47), both journals that provided information on foreign journals. In 1937 he founded the Sociedad de Estudios Afrocubanos (Society of Afro-Cuban Studies) and the journal Estudios Afrocubanos (“Afro-Cuban Studies”).
In 1995 the Foundation Fernando Ortiz was created in Havana for the preservation of his legacy and the continuation of the studies that he started, especially those of Afro-Cuban culture.
