Sir Francis Walsingham,  (born c. 1532, Kent, England—died April 6, 1590, London), English statesman and diplomat who was the principal secretary (1573–90) to Queen Elizabeth I and became legendary for creating a highly effective intelligence network. He successfully thwarted England’s foreign enemies and exposed domestic plotters who sought to unseat Elizabeth and return a Roman Catholic monarch to the throne. Anticipating methods that would become routine only centuries later in the world’s intelligence services, Walsingham employed double agents, covert propaganda and disinformation, code breaking, and agents provocateurs to advance English interests. His efforts culminated in the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587.
Walsingham came from a family that held a number of minor offices at court. His father, a lawyer, died when Walsingham was about two years old. In 1548 Walsingham enrolled at King’s College, the most ardently Protestant and reformist college of the University of Cambridge, and then in 1552 he was admitted to Gray’s Inn in London to study law.
Walsingham, along with hundreds of other zealous Protestants, fled England upon the accession to the throne of the Catholic Mary Tudor (Mary I) in 1553. He lived abroad for five years, studying Roman civil law in Padua, Italy, and becoming fluent in Italian and French. In advice he wrote to his nephew years later, he stressed the importance of both formal and informal education: besides studying ancient and modern history, classics, and languages, a young man should take careful note of the “manners and dispositions” of people from all walks of life whom he met in his travels and seek to understand the actual avenues of power within the state.
After Elizabeth succeeded to the throne in November 1558, Walsingham returned to England and was elected to the Parliament that met in January 1559. He continued to serve as an MP, though with little apparent enthusiasm for the duties, until his death.
In 1568 Walsingham bought a house in London and began performing confidential tasks for Sir William Cecil, Elizabeth’s principal secretary. At Cecil’s behest he cultivated French and Italian émigrés in London from whom he gleaned hints of a plot by Catholic France and Spain "for the alteration of religion and the advancement of the Queen of Scots to the crown." Acknowledging that the reports were vague, Walsingham nonetheless urged that they be taken seriously, writing Cecil that “there is lesse daynger in fearinge to much then too lyttle," a phrase that would become his personal watchword throughout his career. During this time he appears also to have been the anonymous author of a brilliantly poisonous propaganda pamphlet denouncing a rumored intended marriage between Mary Stuart and Thomas Howard, the fourth duke of Norfolk.
In a significant early failure, Walsingham missed a chance to uncover Norfolk’s far more treasonous intentions. A Florentine banker in London, Roberto Ridolfi, had come under suspicion for plotting on Mary’s behalf, and Walsingham interrogated him under house arrest in the autumn of 1569. But Walsingham was naively taken in by Ridolfi’s protestations of innocence. It would only later come out that Ridolfi was passing letters and money between the Spanish ambassador, the pope, the bishop of Ross (Mary’s ambassador in London), and a group of English Catholic lords who were seeking to raise troops to free Mary, now held in confinement in the English Midlands. Norfolk was convicted of treason and was executed in June 1572.
In 1570 Walsingham was appointed ambassador to France. His experiences there would affirm his growing conviction that, with religion now the dominating political fault line in post-Reformation northern Europe, England could no longer trust its long-term security to a rapprochement with any of the Catholic powers. Cecil, however, believed that an alliance with France would prevent it from joining forces with Spain and sought to promote a marriage of Elizabeth with a member of the French royal family and to enlist French support for Protestant rebels in the Spanish Netherlands. Elizabeth’s vacillations on both propositions greatly complicated Walsingham’s negotiations in Paris. During this time he suffered a debilitating attack of what was probably kidney stones. The ailment would plague him for the rest of his life, frequently leaving him in severe pain and bedridden for months at a time.
The massacre of Protestant noblemen in Paris on St. Bartholomew’s Day (August 24/25, 1572) left Walsingham’s diplomatic initiatives in ruins, and it was a personally searing ordeal, as English residents in Paris along with a number of French Protestants took refuge in his house. Although, at the start of his appointment, he had professed himself “utterly unacquainted with that skill that the dealings in Prince’s affairs requireth,” Walsingham displayed considerable professional adroitness and diplomatic sangfroid in the aftermath of the massacre as he sought to gather the truth of what had taken place. He coolly confronted the French queen, Catherine de Médicis, in a series of tense audiences.
Acknowledging the failure of his negotiations for an alliance with the French, he informed the Privy Council, “I think less peril to live with them as enemies, than as friends.” Walsingham also concluded that Mary Stuart would be a focal point for Catholic intrigue against England as long as she remained alive.
Walsingham was recalled to England at the end of 1573 and was appointed to the Privy Council and named a principal secretary. The post was one of pivotal responsibility, handling both domestic and foreign affairs, including all correspondence with ambassadors, but its largely undefined powers depended wholly on the secretary’s personal relationship with the sovereign. Elizabeth at times derided Walsingham’s sober demeanour and dress and his Protestant zeal (calling him a rank Puritan and nicknaming him her "Moor" for his dark appearance) and could be irked by his importuning directness. She nonetheless clearly valued his trustworthiness, industry, unvarnished counsel, and occasional acid humor.
Elizabeth’s habitual refusal to commit herself, as well as the convoluted internal politics of Scotland, France, and the Netherlands, resulted in several frustrating and unsuccessful diplomatic missions Walsingham undertook to those countries over the following 10 years. His strident opposition to a renewal of the French proposal of a marriage between Elizabeth and François, duc d’Anjou, led Elizabeth to angrily dismiss Walsingham from the court for several months in 1579.
Like Cecil before him, Walsingham made a point of accumulating and mastering a vast array of information and statistics concerning government administration, economics, and practical politics. Walsingham assembled a far-flung network of spies and news gatherers in France, Scotland, the Low Countries, Spain, Italy, and even Turkey and North Africa. Using prison informants and double agents whose services he secured through bribery, veiled threats, and often subtle psychological gambits, he worked to penetrate English Catholic circles at home and abroad, particularly among Mary’s friends and agents in Scotland and France and at the Catholic seminaries established in Rome and Douai for training English priests. He eventually was provided £2,000 a year by the government to pay for these secret activities. Walsingham also employed experts on codes and ciphers and in the art of lifting the wax seal of a letter so that it could be undetectably opened and read.
