Gentleman,  in English history, a man entitled to bear arms but not included in the nobility. In its original and strict sense the term denoted a man of good family, deriving from the Latin word gentilis and invariably translated in English-Latin documents as generosus.
For most of the Middle Ages, when the basic social distinction was between nobiles (the tenants in chivalry, whether earls, barons, knights, esquires, or freemen) and ignobiles (serfs, citizens, and burgesses) the word gentleman was roughly equivalent to nobilis. There was, in this respect, no distinction between the great earl and the humble freeman. Even as late as 1400 the term still had only the sense of generosus and could not accurately be used as a personal description denoting rank or quality or as the title of a class. Yet after 1413 it was increasingly so used; the list of landowners in 1431, printed in Feudal Aids, contains, besides knights, esquires, yeomen, and husbandmen, a fair number who are classed as "gentilman."
The immediate cause of this was probably the statute of 1 Henry V., chapter 5 (1413), which required that in all original writs of action, personal appeals, and indictments which involved the process of outlawry, the “estate, degree or mystery” of the defendant must be stated. More widespread influences were also at work: the profound economic changes of the 14th and 15th centuries, caused partly by the Black Death, made it increasingly difficult and unattractive for the younger sons of the nobility to settle on the land. They tended to seek their fortunes abroad in Continental wars or to become dependents of the court or of some great noble house. Such men often chose to describe themselves as gentlemen.
By the 16th century the “gentry” were officially regarded as constituting a distinct order. At the same time, the badge of this distinction came to be thought of as the heralds’ recognition of the right to bear arms. This view was quite unhistorical, for many gentlemen of long descent had never had occasion to assume coat armour and never did. Nevertheless, it became firmly rooted. The result was the extinction, in England, of the identification of gentry with nobility. Since it was held that a gentleman bore arms, it followed that anyone who bore arms was a gentleman, and in the fluid social conditions of the 16th and 17th centuries many acquired the right to bear arms who were ignobiles. Hence the term nobleman came to be reserved for members of the peerage, while anyone who could afford, as William Harrison put it in Description of England (1577), to “live without manual labour, and thereto is able and will bear the port, charge and countenance of a gentleman,” could “for money have a coat and arms bestowed upon him by heralds…and [be] reputed for a gentleman ever after.”
Sought after as an indication of social status, the term gentleman retained a certain value as an index of rank and affluence until the early 19th century. By 1900, under the influence of the political, economic, and social changes of the Victorian era, the word had acquired a variety of usages and meanings which fully reflected the complexity of English society. On the one hand, gentlemen could be a mere synonym of men—used at public places and occasions to distinguish male persons from females, and, on the other hand, acceptance by “society” as a gentleman still required an income derived from sources other than manual labour and retail trade.
In England this view, though much weakened by the social upheavals produced by two World Wars, to some extent prevailed—preserved, cherished, and typified in the rigid distinction on the cricket field between “gentlemen” and “players.” In general, however, the modern "gentleman" is well mannered rather than necessarily well bred or well off. The idea of the gentleman as a "gentle man" is found in Chaucer’s Wife of Bath’s Tale:
It gained, perhaps, its highest expression in Sir Richard Steele, who wrote in 1714 that “the appellation of Gentleman is never to be affixed to a man’s circumstances, but to his Behaviour in them.”
