GLAAD, formerly Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation,  organization created in 1985 that is devoted to countering discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) individuals in the media and promoting understanding, acceptance, and equality. Since its creation GLAAD has been integral to the increased portrayal of LGBTQ persons in the media in a fair, respectful manner that highlights the diversity of the LGBTQ community.
During the 1980s and earlier the portrayal of LGBTQ persons in the media was generally either nonexistent or defamatory. Many felt that the latter was the case in 1985 with media coverage of AIDS-related issues in New York City. The organization that later would be named GLAAD was formed in November of that year when members of the city’s gay and lesbian community met to discuss their dissatisfaction with the situation—in particular, the portrayal of AIDS in the New York Post—and the need to take a stand against the defamatory and sensationalistic media coverage. They initially organized under the name the Gay and Lesbian Anti-Defamation League but changed it in 1986 to the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD) after copyright issues were raised with the original name. In the years following the creation of the New York group, several GLAAD chapters were established in other cities. Since then the organization grew and shifted from being chapter-based to being nationally based with offices in New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and other cities. In 1992, less than 10 years after its inception, GLAAD was noted by Entertainment Weekly as one of the 100 most powerful entities in Hollywood.
GLAAD seeks to ensure that there is fair and accurate coverage and portrayal of LGBTQ individuals in all facets of the media, including newspapers, magazines, motion pictures, television, and radio. As part of that effort, the group responds to inappropriate and discriminatory depictions of LGBTQ persons and educates media outlets with guides to appropriate language and terminology. GLAAD also publishes annual media progress reports. Issues that have drawn significant GLAAD attention include the media’s portrayal of the gay marriage movement, hate-motivated crimes, antigay advocacy, the hate lyrics found in the songs of some musical artists, fraudulent advertising found in ads from the “ex-gay” movement, and the bullying of LGBTQ youth.
The group presents annual media awards at ceremonies generally held in New York City, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. Awards are granted in various media and to persons demonstrating significant efforts for equal and respectful portrayal of LGBTQ persons. The first GLAAD awards were presented in 1989.
In 2013 the organization chose to discontinue the use of “Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation” and elected to instead use its longtime acronym, GLAAD, as its official name. That was done to reflect the group’s inclusiveness of bisexual, transgender, and other individuals in its advocacy efforts as well as the group’s broadened focus on advocacy efforts not pertaining to defamation.
