Gunnar Myrdal, in full Karl Gunnar Myrdal,  (born December 6, 1898, Gustafs, Dalarna, Sweden—died May 17, 1987, Stockholm), Swedish economist and sociologist who was awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1974 (the cowinner was Friedrich A. Hayek). He was regarded as a major theorist of international relations and developmental economics.
Myrdal was educated at Stockholm University, where he earned a law degree in 1923 and a doctorate in economics in 1927. He married Alva Reimer in 1924. After receiving a Rockefeller traveling fellowship in the United States (1929–30), Myrdal became an associate professor at the Institute of International Studies in Geneva (1930–31). He also was professor of political economy (1933–50) and of international economy (1960–67) at Stockholm University; in 1967 he became professor emeritus.
Until the early 1930s Myrdal emphasized pure theory, in sharp contrast to his later concern with applied economics and social problems. In his doctoral dissertation he had examined the role of expectations in price formation, an approach stemming from the work of Frank H. Knight. He applied this theoretical approach to macroeconomics in 1931 when, as a member of the Stockholm school of economics, he delivered the lectures resulting in Monetary Equilibrium (1939). These lectures illustrated the distinction between ex ante (or planned) and ex post (or realized) savings and investment.
At the invitation of the Carnegie Corporation, Myrdal explored the social and economic problems of African Americans in 1938–40 and wrote An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944). In this work Myrdal presented his theory of cumulative causation—that is, of poverty creating poverty. Myrdal also pointed out that two economic policies implemented by President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s administration inadvertently destroyed jobs for hundreds of thousands of African Americans. The first such policy involved restrictions on cotton production, instituted to raise the incomes of farm owners. Myrdal wrote: “It seems, therefore, that the agricultural policies, and particularly the Agricultural Adjustment program (A.A.A.), which was instituted in May, 1933, was the factor directly responsible for the drastic curtailment in number of Negro and white sharecroppers and Negro cash and share tenants.” (Italics in original.) The second policy was the minimum wage, which, Myrdal pointed out, made employers less willing to hire relatively unskilled people, many of whom were African American.
From 1947 to 1957 Myrdal was executive secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. In his writings on developmental economics, Myrdal warned that economic development of rich and poor countries might never converge. Instead, the two might possibly diverge, with poor countries locked into producing less-profitable primary goods while rich countries reaped the profits associated with economies of scale. This pessimistic view, however, has not been borne out by events.
In other books Myrdal combined his economic research with sociological studies. These include The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory (1930) and Beyond the Welfare State: Economic Planning and Its International Implications (1960). The book Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations (1968) represents a 10-year study of poverty in Asia. Whereas Mydral was a Malthusian who thought that population growth in Asia would stunt economic growth, conditions in the early 21st century show that many Asian countries have experienced both population growth and high economic growth.
