Hannah Bachman Einstein, née Hannah Bachman,  (born Jan. 28, 1862, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Nov. 28, 1929, New York City),  American social worker who launched a successful campaign to establish municipal, state, and national boards and associations for child welfare.
Hannah Bachman married William Einstein in 1881. She developed an interest in charitable work, and from its founding in about 1890 she was active in the Temple Emanu-El Sisterhood, which undertook a program of direct relief and home visitation to needy families. She became a trustee of the United Hebrew Charities of New York in 1896, and in 1897 she was chosen president of the sisterhood, a position she held until 1922. She was named chairman of the relief committee of the United Hebrew Charities in 1903.
Courses at Columbia University and at the New York School of Philanthropy sharpened her understanding of social problems and welfare methods. Einstein’s interest came to focus on the plight of working mothers and their children. She became convinced that maintaining the integrity of the family was of paramount importance to society and that the public at large had an obligation to support widowed or abandoned mothers so that they might devote full time to the rearing of their children. No such form of public relief then existed, and private agencies either disagreed with the idea or lacked resources for it. In 1909 she organized and became president of the Widowed Mothers’ Fund Association to pursue her goal. Within a year she had begun to campaign for the reform of the public welfare system to include a “mother’s pension.” Overcoming the objections of welfare officials, who preferred institutional to “outdoor” relief, and of private agencies, which opposed public relief generally, she won enough influential support, notably that of Sophie Loeb of the New York Evening World, to induce the New York legislature to establish a State Commission on Relief for Widowed Mothers in 1913. The commission appointed an investigating committee, headed by Einstein, to report on the need for new legislation. Legislation authorizing the creation of local Child Welfare Boards to administer public aid to dependent widows with children, defeated in 1914, passed on a second try in 1915. With the creation of the New York City Child Welfare Board, Einstein became chairman of its central families committee; she held that post for the rest of her life. She subsequently served as president of the New York State Association of Child Welfare Boards and helped found the National Union of Public Child Welfare Officers. By 1920 the movement she had begun in 1909 had spread to nearly every state.
