Hannah Kent Schoff, née Hannah Kent,  (born June 3, 1853, Upper Darby, Pa., U.S.—died Dec. 10, 1940, Philadelphia, Pa.),  American welfare worker and reformer who was influential in state and national child welfare and juvenile criminal legislation in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Schoff married in 1873 and eventually settled in Philadelphia. She attended the first National Congress of Mothers in Washington, D.C., in 1897, and the next year she was elected vice president of the permanent National Congress of Mothers. In 1899 she organized the Pennsylvania Congress of Mothers, the second state branch of the national group to come into being, and she served as its president until 1902, when she was elected president of the National Congress of Mothers. In that post, which she held until 1920, she established an endowment fund and a national headquarters in Washington, D.C., oversaw the multiplication of member state branches from 8 to 37 with a total of 190,000 members, and edited the organization’s journal Child Welfare (later National Parent-Teacher). She also organized several international conferences on child welfare sponsored by the U.S. State Department and the Congress of Mothers. The National Congress of Mothers and Parent-Teacher Associations (later called the National Congress of Parents and Teachers) became a major force behind proposed legislation in the areas of child labour, marriage, and education.
A Philadelphia police case in 1899, in which an eight-year-old girl, a boardinghouse slavey, was arrested and imprisoned for arson, moved Schoff to initiate a campaign for reform in the treatment of juvenile offenders. After securing the release and placement of that child in a foster home, she studied the issue and drew up a series of bills for the Philadelphia legislature. As passed in 1901, after vigorous lobbying by Schoff and others, the legislation established a distinct juvenile court system (the nation’s second, after Chicago’s), separate detention homes for children, and a system of probation officers. In its first eight years of operation she personally observed virtually every session of the Philadelphia juvenile court. She also assisted in the establishment of such courts in several other states and in Canada, where she was the first woman ever invited to address Parliament. In 1909 she became chairman of the American Committee on the Causes of Crime in Normal Children, established under the aegis of the U.S. Bureau of Education. Her detailed survey of juvenile crime led to the publication of The Wayward Child (1915). Schoff was also interested in home education and was in large part responsible for the establishment of the Home Education Division within the U.S. Bureau of Education.
