Henry Street Settlement,  settlement house complex in New York City, founded in 1893 by American nurse and social worker Lillian D. Wald as a nursing service for immigrants. Initially composed of several properties on Henry Street, the settlement later expanded throughout the Manhattan’s Lower East Side.
At age 22 Wald moved to New York City to attend the New York Hospital School of Nursing. In 1893, after she had earned a nursing degree, Wald and her friend and colleague Mary Brewster founded the Visiting Nurse Service. That same year Wald started teaching a hygiene and home nursing class on the Lower East Side and coined the term public health nurse to differentiate the role of nurses who work in poor neighbourhoods. To be close to the community they served, Wald and Brewster moved into an apartment just two blocks away from the future location of the settlement. By 1894 the pair had visited 125 tenement families. When Brewster fell ill, she decided to leave the Visiting Nurse Service.
Wald, to help finance the settlement she envisioned, solicited the aid of Lower East Side German Jewish community leaders, asking them, “Have you ever seen a starving child cry?” Her appeal came to the attention of the American financier and philanthropist Jacob Schiff, who donated three Federal-style row houses he owned on Henry Street and had them converted into buildings for public use. Wald hired a staff of six nurses and moved into one of those properties.
By 1898 Henry Street Settlement had a staff of 11 full-time workers, and in 1902 it acquired three more Henry Street buildings. One of them included a gymnasium. The Henry Street Settlement offered English classes for new immigrants, established a savings bank, and provided vocational training, public lectures, a library, and various clubs and activities. Wald created one of New York City’s first playgrounds, in the settlement house’s small backyard, and helped start the Outdoor Recreation League, which pushed to organize public playgrounds and parks.
Henry Street Settlement was designed as a community meeting place. Visitors were referred to simply as neighbours. Wald’s mission for the settlement house was not only to provide quality services but also to be involved in social change. In 1909 Wald offered the use of the Henry Street Settlement for the National Negro Conference, which became the founding meeting for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The settlement’s facilities were also used for union meetings (after the Triangle shirtwaist factory fire); to draft child labour laws; to establish Mobilization for Youth, an urban reform program focused on poverty and juvenile delinquency; and to help develop public housing, a government program providing affordable rental apartments to low-income, disabled, and elderly individuals.
Henry Street Settlement influenced the New York City Board of Education in 1902 to pay the salary of Lina L. Rogers, the first public school nurse. The New York City Board of Education and the New York City Board of Health subsequently started their own program to include 12 school nurses on the public payroll—the first such service in the world. Wald lobbied for free lunches for all children in the public school system and helped move the Board of Education to create the first Department of Special Education. By 1906 the Henry Street Settlement had a team of 27 nurses aiding the Lower East Side; by 1914 that number had grown to more than 100.
In 1908 Henry Street Settlement opened two summer camps: Camp Henry for boys and Echo Hill Farm for girls. The sisters Irene and Alice Lewisohn built the Neighborhood Playhouse (later renamed the Harry De Jur Playhouse) in 1915. It was used for Henry Street Settlement art programs. The Henry Street Music School was opened in 1927.
Following her retirement in 1930, Wald was replaced by Helen Hall, who had directed the University Settlement in Philadelphia. At the time of Wald’s death in 1940, nearly 300 nurses worked out of 20 branches of the Henry Street Settlement around New York City.
In 1989 the three original Henry Street buildings were designated a national historic landmark. They are America’s oldest existing settlement house.
