Homophobia,  culturally produced fear of or prejudice against homosexuals that sometimes manifests itself in legal restrictions or, in extreme cases, bullying or even violence against homosexuals (sometimes called “gay bashing”). The term homophobia was coined in the late 1960s and was used prominently by George Weinberg, an American clinical psychologist, in his book Society and the Healthy Homosexual (1972). Although the suffix phobia generally designates an irrational fear, in the case of homophobia the word instead refers to an attitudinal disposition ranging from mild dislike to abhorrence of people who are sexually or romantically attracted to individuals of the same sex. Homophobia is a culturally conditioned response to homosexuality, and attitudes toward homosexuals vary widely across cultures and over time.
Although little is known about premodern women’s sexualities, it is largely believed that the sexual desire of one man for another was an acceptable, often venerated form of love in ancient cultures. Intolerance toward homosexual behaviour grew particularly in the Middle Ages, especially among the adherents of Christianity and Islam.
To understand the wider cultural impact of homophobia, awareness of the general societal consensus of the nature of homosexuality is necessary. In Western cultures in the later 19th century, some psychologists began to view homosexuality as more than a temporary behaviour, understanding that it was immutable. As industrialization brought migration from rural to urban areas, the greater density of people in cities permitted same-sex attracted individuals to organize (initially under the cloak of anonymity), which ultimately led to greater visibility and the scientific study of homosexuality.
The term homosexuality was first used in 1868, and the research of Richard von Krafft-Ebing two decades later in Psychopathia Sexualis (1886; trans. into English in 1892) portrayed homosexuality as a fixed sexual desire. In 1905 Sigmund Freud popularized the erroneous notion that homosexuality was the product of a child’s upbringing, writing, “The presence of both parents plays an important part. The absence of a strong father in childhood not infrequently favours the occurrence of inversion.” Freud even gave child-rearing tips to help parents lead their children to heterosexual adjustment.
With Freud’s warning in mind, and because of the long working hours that men spent under industrialization, homosocial organizations (e.g., sporting clubs and the Boy Scouts) were developed to introduce young boys to heterosexual masculine role models in the absence of their fathers. The teaching of masculinity to boys and femininity to girls was (and often remains) falsely believed to be able to prevent children from becoming homosexual.
Gender has long been implicated with sexuality, and the trials of Irish writer Oscar Wilde, who in 1895 was convicted of gross indecency, furthered this belief. The unusual aesthetic appearance that Wilde represented, alongside his penchant for aesthetic art and beauty, helped formulate homosexual suspicion for men who shared Wilde’s feminine flair. Wilde’s conviction thus helped promote the stereotype that homosexuality existed among feminine men, thereby erroneously disqualifying masculine-acting men from homosexual suspicion.
The power of homophobia is such that homosexual individuals often feel culturally compelled to misrepresent their sexuality (something known as being “in the closet”) in order to avoid social stigma. However, homophobia also impacts heterosexuals, as it is impossible to definitively prove one’s heterosexuality. Accordingly, heterosexuals and homosexuals wishing to be thought heterosexual are compelled to avoid associating with anything coded as homosexual. This is accomplished through the repeated association with cultural codes of heterosexuality and disassociation from codes for homosexuality. Conversely, the suspicion that someone is homosexual often is cast upon whoever displays behaviour gender-coded appropriate for the opposite sex. For men, competitive team sports, violence, cars, beer, and an emotionless disposition have been associated with masculinity (and thus heterosexuality), while an appreciation of the arts, fine food, individual sports, and emotional expressionism has been associated with homosexuality. This equation is reversed for women.
A homohysteric culture (a term coined by American sociologist Eric Anderson) can be created by the combination of an awareness of homosexuality and a high degree of homophobia. In such a culture, it is believed that anyone might be gay, and, as a result, heterosexuals’ social, sexual, and personal behaviours are limited because men fear association with femininity and women fear association with masculinity.
In a homohysteric culture, individuals are concerned with proving their heterosexuality because homosexuality is stigmatized. Conversely, when cultural homophobia is so great that citizens do not generally believe that homosexuality is even possible (as in many contemporary Middle Eastern, African, and Asian cultures), there is no need to prove to one’s peers that one is not gay. A manifestation of this notion can be seen in Iran, whose president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, said in a speech in the United States in 2007 that his country had no homosexuals. Others have sometimes labeled homosexuality a “white disease.” Ironically, in some highly homophobic (yet not homohysteric) cultures, heterosexuals are given more freedom of gendered expression. Men can, for example, hold hands in many highly homophobic cultures (because others do not perceive they can be homosexual), while hand holding among men raises homosexual suspicion in the West.
