Human security,  approach to national and international security that gives primacy to human beings and their complex social and economic interactions.
The concept of human security represents a departure from orthodox security studies, which focus on the security of the state. The subjects of the human security approach are individuals, and its end goal is the protection of people from traditional (i.e., military) and nontraditional threats such as poverty and disease. Moving the security agenda beyond state security does not mean replacing it but rather involves complementing and building on it. Central to this approach is the understanding that human security deprivations can undermine peace and stability within and between states, whereas an overemphasis on state security can be detrimental to human welfare. The state remains a central provider of security, but state security is not a sufficient condition for human welfare.
Human security fully entered the policy and academic debates in the early 1990s. Nevertheless, despite its widespread usage within national and international policy circles, its definition remains highly contested. The holistic vision of protecting the security of people lends itself to a variety of interpretations shaped by relative understandings of what constitutes a threat to the security of individuals, how the intensity and repercussion of any given threat can be measured (i.e., historical data or forward-looking forecasts), and by what possible means the threat can be prevented or removed. The coalition of states and supranational organizations that have supported the approach can count numerous accomplishments, such as the Ottawa Convention (i.e., Mine Ban Treaty), the establishment of the International Criminal Court, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the Child.
The idea of extending the concept of security from state security to individual human beings was first articulated by the Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security Issues in 1982. The Common Security report provided the first comprehensive criticism of the purely military approach to security while highlighting the need to devote due attention to the relation between security and the well-being of individuals. After years of latency, a crucial point in history for the development of the concept is the end of the Cold War and the revitalization of long-standing bottom-up arguments within progressive academic and policy circles, once it was realized that the disappearance of the superpowers’ military threats did not necessarily entail an enhanced level of security for citizens within states. The evolution of the security discourse was also molded by the need to address the global social problems arising within the context of a globalizing world. The potential threats to individuals’ lives and well-being were therefore extended from being primarily military to broadly encompass economic, social, environmental, and health concerns.
In connection with the immediate post-Cold War period and the new development agenda, the first authoritative definition of human security was provided in 1994 when Mahbub ul Haq drew attention to the concept in the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Report. Beyond territorial and military concerns, the report argued that human security is fundamentally concerned with human life and dignity. For analytical purposes, UNDP disentangled its four main characteristics: it is universal, its components are interdependent, it is best ensured through prevention, and it is people-centred. On the more substantive level, the definition of human security given in the report remained broad and all-encompassing. For UNDP, human security meant safety from chronic threats such as hunger, disease, and repression, and it meant protection from sudden and hurtful disruptions in the patterns of daily life. Understood in these terms, human security has also been encapsulated in the “freedom from fear” and “freedom from want” policy axiom. Although acknowledging the varying intensity of possible threats to human welfare, UNDP grouped these threats in seven nonexhaustive and nonexclusive security categories—community, economic, environmental, food, health, personal, and political. Despite the broadness and the apparent conceptual weaknesses of the definition provided by the report, the general prescriptions outlined therein provided a useful springboard for academic inquiry and remained a useful organizing concept for the work of international organizations throughout the 1990s.
The 1994 UNDP report opened an outlet for the academic redefinition of human security. Numerous scholars attempted to disentangle the dimensions of what immediately appeared to be an overly unrestrained analytical tool, which, by virtue of its all-encompassing nature, could lose its meaning. A number of scholars worked toward a recategorization of what could be classified a threat to human security.
The reconceptualization of human security engaged scholars in a fierce academic debate—some in favour of narrowing the concept to a valuable essence and some wanting to preserve its holistic character. On the grounds of analytical rigour, pragmatism, and policy relevance, some experts argued that the sole denominator for the human security agenda should be a focus on violent threats. In this view, a listlike description of any possible “bad thing” that could happen to individuals is a peril to conceptual clarity and renders causal analysis virtually impossible. Advocates of the broad theorization opposed this approach. They argued that once the referent of the security agenda becomes the individual, it is impossible to disentangle violent threats to individuals from other issues such as poverty, environmental degradation, and infectious diseases that directly impinge on the safety, freedom, and self-realization of human beings. In this view, human security means not only meeting basic needs but also the realization of human dignity. Other scholars offer a middle approach, bridging the narrow and broad conceptualizations. They produced an analytical scheme including only those elements that, in their view, human beings might fight over or risk their lives for.
The debate is far from settled and remains a source of controversy. In particular, all the attempts that have been made to sharpen the definition of human security had to confront the exclusive problems of either attaching a value and a priority to possible potential threats to human life and vaguely justifying such a choice or of maintaining the undefined connotations embedded in the original proposal while losing analytical rigour.
