Informal organization,  the manner in which an organization operates in reality, as opposed to its formal distribution of roles and responsibilities.
The concept of informal organization draws attention to the patterns of activity and interpersonal relationships that develop inside an organization and are not reflected in an organizational chart or personnel manual. It sheds light on what actually happens when an organization’s members perform (or do not perform) their jobs. The informal organization can work in conjunction with, parallel to, or against the formal organization.
The informal organization can be most directly contrasted with the rational-legal model of bureaucracy theorized by the German sociologist Max Weber. Weber’s model is intentionally impersonal. There, responsibilities and functions reside in an office and are designed such that anyone with the necessary skills can occupy the office, learn how to perform its function, and do so with little variation in outputs. In contrast, the informal organization is intensely personal. Individuals may occupy roles and offices, but they bring to those offices their own interests, values, and assumptions. Their organizational behaviour is as much a function of their personalities as of their formal duties. Workers develop friendships (and enemies), trusted sources of information, and preferences for how to accomplish assigned tasks that may or may not support the formal organization.
The informal organization was first noted in experiments conducted in the early 1930s in which researchers noted the presence of a social organization in addition to the technical one that governed worker behaviour. The social organization was structured and orderly, just as the formal organization was, and in this case worked to counter organizational efforts to structure the work process. Some experts argue that an executive’s work is chiefly concerned with shaping the social organization so that it works in conjunction with the technical organization. Indeed, the modern emphasis on organizational culture, mission statements, and efforts to empower workers can be seen as attempts by managers to structure the informal organization so that it reinforces rather than counteracts the technical core of the organization.
The informal organization fell out of favour in the 1960s. Its legacy, however, can be seen in later work on institutional theory and network analysis. Institutional theory views the organizational world as a construct of the ideas and conceptions of its members. Network analysis focuses on the interaction of culture, human agency, and social structure.
