Institutionalization,  process of developing or transforming rules and procedures that influence a set of human interactions.
Institutionalization is a process intended to regulate societal behaviour (i.e., supra-individual behaviour) within organizations or entire societies. At least three actions in the process can be distinguished: (1) rulemaking or installment, (2) rule adaptation, or developing best practices, and (3) rule change, or replacing old rules with new ones.
By the early 20th century, German sociologist Max Weber was already aware of processes of institutionalization and their subtle variations. He explicitly differentiated between rule configurations that were goal-oriented (Zweckrationalität) and those that were idea-consolidating (Wertrationalität).  For example, the division of powers in government is institutionalized both as an organizational framework that results from and influences the competitions of political actors and as an attempt to safeguard a certain conception of liberty. Institutionalization is thus a human activity that installs, adapts, and changes rules and procedures in both social and political spheres. It affects the interactive behaviour of individuals and organizations as well as of political entities (e.g., states). This distinction between individuals, collective actors, and polities is important, because the ways in which rules and procedures are developed and subsequently become operational are different for each sphere. For example, the development and establishment of liberal democracy is actually an ongoing process of institutionalization. On the one hand, it reflects a shared value within a society as expressed in its appreciation of individual political and civil rights (Wertrationalität), but, on the other hand, the relationship between state and society is organized by means of basic laws to define its mode of governance to make it work democratically (Zweckrationalität).
With regard to social interactions, rules evolve more often than not in a nonbinding fashion, albeit depending on informal hierarchies and whether they are born out of necessity. Eventually, many practical rules are developed into institutionalized behaviour that remains more or less stable over time: practices become shared rules that in turn are formalized in supra-individual terms (e.g., the Ten Commandments in the Bible and Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s idea of the social contract).
This type of institutionalization may well be typical of organizations and societal development as such. Yet it is not typical of the political sphere: political systems are by definition characterized by the existence of binding rules that are formalized (e.g., by law or constitution) and can be enforced independently of individual actors (as in the case of enforcement by the police). Although procedures may differ to some extent, both rules and procedures are subject to scrutiny and external controls (by the judiciary, the legislature, electorates, and so on) that are characterized by hierarchical relationships. In this view, human interactions within a polity are prescribed and largely predictable. Hence, the process of institutionalization enhances a system’s stability. Yet it should immediately be noticed that also in the political sphere rules and procedures change. For example, they may be adapted when unintended consequences occur and the legitimacy of a political system is negatively affected by the relationship between rules and procedures, on the one hand, and by political behaviour and the system’s performance, on the other hand. Electoral reform and decentralization are examples of restoring the institutional framework of the polity to enhance legitimacy. The debates on a constitution for the European Union (EU) and on establishing democracy in postcommunist Europe in the 1990s reflected the attempt to regulate political behaviour and to enhance responsible government. Political institutionalization is therefore not a static but a dynamic process.
Institutional analysis has produced various explanations for the emergence and change of rule configurations and related behaviour with regard to political and social outcomes. The three main types of explanation may be characterized as rational choice, culture matters, and shock and crisis.
In rational choice theory, institutionalization is regarded as the urge to promote general welfare, where rules of behaviour constrain the actor in choosing strategies of goal attainment. This is a well-established and widespread approach within institutional analysis and is well suited to understanding the emergence of governance in all its variations (from public to private, and so on), assuming that the actors’ preferences are stable and their interests are revealed in a transparent fashion (as is, for instance, assumed under democratic conditions in relation to party competition). However, although rational choice does perform quite well if these assumptions are met with respect to analyzing highly institutionalized systems and circumstances, it does less well in situations where conflict and values are prominent. It appears that this type of explanation is suitable for policy analysis and routinized behaviour.
In the culture-matters explanation, the embeddedness of values and norms and their influence on social and political relations is seen as constitutive of the process of institutionalization. In the cultural approach, mutual trust is the basis for acceptance and justification of rulemaking and perseverance. For instance, the process of democratization is thought to depend on the cultural context in which formal binding rules are operational. This approach appears suitable for understanding behavioral variation of political actors under seemingly similar institutional arrangements like liberal democracy.
According to shock and crisis theory, institutions change as a result of exogenous and indigenous shocks to a system. Rule adaptation or the installment of new rules and procedures can be conceived as different responses of political systems to a (perceived) crisis. Apart from a breakdown, this can also mean adapting the existing framework of reference for problem solving by government. Alternatively, endogenous shocks are often seen as sources for radical institutional change. More often than not, this is conducive to institutional battles over the preferred direction of change and conflicts over the extent of change. Examples of this are the breakup of the Soviet Union and the emergence and development of the EU. In this perspective, institutional change is analyzed with a view on shifting power relations among actors. The reorganization of a polity’s rule adaptation and related procedures is then considered as a redeployment of power resources.
Institutionalization is a complex process of evolving rules and procedures that is by definition dynamic. As institutions must be considered as humanly devised contracts of social and political actors, the actual working and related performance of institutions is conducive to changes in society and its mode of governance.
