Italic languages,  certain Indo-European languages that were once spoken in the Apennine Peninsula (modern Italy) and in the eastern part of the Po valley. These include the Latin, Faliscan, Osco-Umbrian, South Picene, and Venetic languages, which have in common a considerable number of features that separate them from the other languages of the same area—e.g., from Greek and Etruscan. (In a more narrow sense, the term Italic languages excludes Latin and denotes only Osco-Umbrian, South Picene, Faliscan, and Venetic.)
For a long time the Italic languages have been considered to be an Indo-European subfamily like Celtic, Germanic, or Slavic. Today some scholars are inclined to distinguish within the so-called Italic branch at least three independent members of the Indo-European family: Latin (with Faliscan), Osco-Umbrian (with South Picene), and Venetic (if indeed this is an Italic language, as will be assumed in this article). They attribute the similarities—i.e., the unifying phenomena in the division—to a convergence that took place when the speakers of these different idioms were integrated into the “Italic” civilization of the early 1st millennium bce. The culture that resulted is known as the “Etruscan koine.”
Latin is the language of Latium and of Rome; its earliest known documents date to the 6th century bce. Rich epigraphic evidence and an extensive literature began at the end of the 3rd century bce, at the time when Roman Latin was emerging as the predominant language of Italy. By 100 ce at the latest, Latin had effaced all the other dialects between Sicily and the Alps, with the exception of Greek in the colonies of Magna Graecia.
The other Italic languages—Italic languages in the narrow sense—are known through local and personal names transmitted by Greek and Roman sources, and especially from inscriptions.
Before Latin spread out, Oscan was the most widely spoken group of dialects of the Apennine Peninsula. It was used by the Samnites in Samnium and Campania, by the inhabitants of Lucania and Bruttium, and, with slight variations, by smaller tribes between Latium and the Adriatic coast—the Volsci, Marsi, Paeligni, Vestini, and Marrucini. (Those distinct “minor dialects” within the Oscan language continuum are referred to as Volscian, Marsian, Paelignian, etc., and collectively as Sabellic, or Sabellian, dialects; this term can also refer more generally to the Italic languages other than Latin and Venetic, roughly comparable to the narrow sense of the term Italic languages.) The legendary Sabines, who shared the earliest history of Rome, probably also spoke an Oscan dialect. The most important Oscan texts come from Campanian cities, as do the oldest ones (several so-called Paleo-Oscan, or “Pre-Samnite,” vessel inscriptions of the form “I belong to So-and-so,” dating to as early as the mid-6th century bce). The largest text, a treaty between Nola and Abella from the 2nd century bce, is carved on a stone slab, called the Cippus Abellanus. In Bantia, a nearly unknown town of Lucania, the Tabula Bantina is preserved, the most extensive Oscan inscription. It is a bronze tablet with penal laws concerning municipal administration, written in Latin letters during the first half of the 1st century bce. The oldest Oscan text of any length is the so-called Agnone Tablet of about 250 bce (a small bronze tablet found near Fonte Romito, between Agnone and Capracotta), detailing cultic instructions related to the worship of Ceres and other divinities. The remainder of the Oscan corpus includes diverse material, some of which is of considerable cultural interest (short cultic and sacrificial texts, curse tablets, and several types of municipal inscriptions).
The Umbrian idiom, closely related to Oscan, is known from a few small inscriptions and from the Tabulae Iguvinae (Iguvine Tables), which consist of seven bronze tablets found at Gubbio (the ancient Iguvium). Constituting one of the largest and most important epigraphic documents of antiquity, the tablets contain ritual regulations of a sacred brotherhood to which a considerable part of the public cults of Iguvium was delegated. The Tabulae Iguvinae were incised, partly in the Umbrian alphabet and partly in Latin letters, within the last three centuries bce, but portions of the text itself result from a far more remote oral tradition.
Approximately two dozen short inscriptions from the southern part of ancient Picenum (most of them found near Ascoli Piceno and Teramo) preserve extremely early remains (6th and 5th centuries bce) of the Italic language now known as South Picene. Formerly referred to as Old Sabellian or Central Adriatic, South Picene shows close affinities to Oscan and Umbrian. (North Picene, known mainly from a 12-line inscription of about 500 bce on a stele from Novilara, is not an Italic language and may not even be an Indo-European language.)
Faliscan inscriptions appear only in the immediate surroundings of Falerii (the present Civita Castellana in central Italy), which, except for its dialect, seems to have been a completely Etruscan city. The Faliscan corpus consists mainly of short sepulchral inscriptions, most of which date to the 4th century bce and later. There are, however, several important Archaic Faliscan vessel inscriptions, including some from as early as the 6th century bce that show evidence of poetic composition.
