Janie Porter Barrett, née Janie Porter,  (born Aug. 9, 1865, Athens, Ga., U.S.—died Aug. 27, 1948, Hampton, Va.),  American welfare worker and educator who developed a school to rehabilitate previously incarcerated African-American girls by improving their self-reliance and discipline.
The daughter of former slaves, Barrett grew up largely in the home of the cultured white family who employed her mother. She graduated from Hampton Institute in Hampton, Va., in 1884 and worked for five years as a teacher before establishing an informal day-care school in her home in Hampton. Her school grew rapidly, and in 1890 it was formally organized as the Locust Street Social Settlement, the nation’s first settlement house for African-Americans. In 1902 she and her husband built a separate structure on their property to house the settlement’s numerous activities, which included clubs, classes in domestic skills, and recreation; many of these activities were funded by Northern philanthropists.
In 1908 Barrett founded and became president of the Virginia State Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs. Through the federation she worked to raise money for a residential industrial school for young African-American girls who had been incarcerated. In 1914 a 147-acre farm at Peake (also known as Peaks Turnout) was purchased, and in January 1915 the Virginia Industrial School for Colored Girls opened with 28 students. With help from many prominent social workers and especially from the Russell Sage Foundation, the school developed a program that stressed self-reliance and self-discipline, visible rewards, “big-sister” guidance, and close attention to individual needs, as well as academic and vocational instruction.
In 1915 the newly widowed Barrett became the school’s superintendent. She personally conducted the parole system by which girls who demonstrated sufficient responsibility were placed in carefully selected foster homes, given employment, and supported by such follow-up services as ministerial guidance, a newsletter (The Booster), and personal letters. In 1920 the state of Virginia assumed financial responsibility for the school. Supervision was shared by the state and the women’s club federation until 1942, when it became solely a function of the Virginia Department of Welfare and Institutions. Barrett retired as superintendent in 1940. Ten years later the school was renamed the Janie Porter Barrett School for Girls.
