Jean Baudrillard,  (born July 29, 1929, Reims, France—died March 6, 2007, Paris), French sociologist and cultural theorist whose theoretical ideas of “hyperreality” and “simulacrum” influenced literary theory and philosophy, especially in the United States, and spread into popular culture.
After studying German at the Sorbonne, Baudrillard taught German literature in secondary schools (1956–66), translated German literary and philosophical works, and published essays in the literary review Les Temps Modernes. At the same time, he attended the University of Paris X at Nanterre, where in 1968 he completed a dissertation in sociology, Le Système des objects (The System of Objects), under the direction of Marxist historian Henri Lefebvre. Baudrillard taught (1966–68) in the sociology department at Nanterre, which was one of the centres of the May 1968 student revolts, with which he was in sympathy. He then moved to the University of Paris IX (now the University of Paris at Dauphine), from which he retired in 1987.
Baudrillard’s early work—including The System of Objects, La Société de consommation (1970; The Consumer Society), and Pour une critique de l’économie politique du signe (1972; For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign)—combines Marxist political economy and a semiotics (theory of signs) influenced by Roland Barthes in a critique of everyday life in consumer society, in which, according to Baudrillard, things have symbolic value in addition to values derived from Marxian use and exchange. In Le Miroir de la production; ou, l’illusion critique du matérialisme historique (1973; The Mirror of Production) and L’Échange symbolique et la mort (1976; Symbolic Exchange and Death), Baudrillard broke with Marxism to develop an account of postmodern society in which consumer and electronic images have become more real (hyperreal) than physical reality and in which simulations of reality (simulacra) have displaced their originals, leaving only “the desert of the real.” This phrase was quoted in the popular American science-fiction film The Matrix (1999), whose hero hides contraband in a copy of Baudrillard’s Simulacra and Simulation (originally published as Simulacres et simulation, 1981). An accomplished photographer, Baudrillard asserted that “every photographed object is merely the trace left behind by the disappearance of all the rest.”
Among Baudrillard’s other major works are Oublier Foucault (1977; Forget Foucault); Amérique (1986; America), based on a trip to the United States; La Guerre du Golfe n’a pas eu lieu (1991; The Gulf War Did Not Take Place); Jean Baudrillard: Photographies 1985–1998 (1999),  a collection of his images and related essays; and L’Esprit du terrorisme (2002; The Spirit of Terrorism: And Requiem for the Twin Towers). The first issue of The International Journal of Baudrillard Studies appeared in early 2004.
