Johns Hopkins,  (born May 19, 1795, Anne Arundel County, Md., U.S.—died  Dec. 24, 1873, Baltimore), U.S. millionaire merchant and investor who in his will left large endowments to found Johns Hopkins University and Johns Hopkins Hospital.
The son of a Quaker tobacco planter, Johns Hopkins quit school at the age of 12 to work the family fields after his parents—in accord with their Quaker conscience—had emancipated their slaves. Awareness of his own educational limitations and of the needs of the newly freed blacks would stay with him and influence him for the rest of his life.
At the age of 17, Hopkins went to live with his uncle in Baltimore and learn the wholesale grocery business. He managed the business well but quarreled with his uncle in 1819 when the uncle refused to permit farmers to pay for goods in whiskey. Johns Hopkins thereupon went into business with a partner and later with three of his brothers.
Hopkins Brothers prospered, delivering goods throughout Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and even into Ohio. The firm freely accepted payment in whiskey, which it then sold as Hopkins’ Best. Johns Hopkins devoted himself entirely to the business, never traveling, never marrying, and seldom spending money on personal pleasures. When he retired in 1847, he was a very wealthy man.
He increased his wealth through farsighted investments in Baltimore real estate and businesses, becoming the largest private individual stockholder in the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. He was also a director of several banks and a major investor in insurance companies, warehouses, and steamship lines, and he exerted a major influence on the development of Baltimore’s commerce.
Six years before his death, Johns Hopkins organized two corporations, one for a hospital and one for a university, and his will (1870) divided $7,000,000 equally between them. He also endowed an orphanage for black children. Johns Hopkins University opened its doors in 1876, the hospital in 1889; and a medical school utilizing the facilities of both held its first class—admitting women on the same basis as men—in 1893.
