John du Pont, in full John Eleuthère du Pont,  (born November 22, 1938, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died December 9, 2010, Somerset, Pennsylvania), American philanthropist who supported amateur freestyle wrestling and who on January 26, 1996, shot and killed freestyle wrestler Dave Schultz, an Olympic gold medalist who lived and trained at du Pont’s estate. Du Pont was convicted though found to be mentally ill, and he died while in prison.
Du Pont, a member of the du Pont family and heir to a considerable fortune, grew up and spent most of his life on the 800-acre Liseter Hall Farm in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania. Du Pont’s parents, who raised and trained Thoroughbred racehorses, divorced when he was two years old, and he and his mother remained on the estate. After graduating (1957) from high school, du Pont briefly attended the University of Pennsylvania. He later enrolled in the University of Miami, where he swam on the varsity team and from which he earned a degree in biology. He developed a passion for ornithology and natural history, and he amassed a collection of tens of thousands of preserved birds, birds’ eggs, and seashells. In 1957 he founded the Delaware Museum of Natural History; the institution, originally based on du Pont’s collections, opened outside Wilmington, Delaware, in 1972, with du Pont serving as its director.
Du Pont’s fascination with sports eclipsed his interest in natural history, however. He moved on from swimming to pentathlon, in which he won the 1965 Australian championship, and he hosted the 1968 U.S. pentathlon championships on his estate. Although he never achieved his dream of qualifying for an Olympic team, he managed the U.S. pentathlon team at the Montreal 1976 Olympic Games.
In the 1980s du Pont changed his focus to freestyle wrestling. In 1985 he donated money to establish a varsity wrestling team at Villanova University, for which he served as head coach. Du Pont built a state-of-the-art training facility at his estate, which he renamed Foxcatcher Farm, after his father’s racing stables. In addition, he established an Olympic wrestling club, Team Foxcatcher, one of only a few such organizations in the United States, and he recruited top wrestlers, among them Mark Schultz, the younger brother of Dave Schultz and also an Olympic champion. Du Pont was an extraordinarily generous sponsor, providing stipends, travel expenses, and for some, free housing at Foxcatcher Farm. Among those living at the estate was Dave Schultz, who was a coach for Team Foxcatcher and was also in training for the 1996 Olympics.
From at least the 1980s, du Pont was known to drink heavily and to use cocaine. He seemed to have little control over his temper, and he had an extensive arms collection. He required others to cooperate in maintaining his fantasy that he was himself an accomplished wrestler and athlete. Du Pont became increasingly prone to delusions, many of them paranoid in nature, especially after his mother’s death in 1988. A brief marriage in 1983–84 ended after his wife left him, fearing for her life. His erratic behaviour was dismissed by many of his wrestlers and the police force as eccentricity, and few people regarded him as dangerous until he fatally shot Dave Schultz at Foxcatcher Farm in January 1996. Du Pont was captured after a 48-hour standoff. He was convicted in 1997 of third-degree murder and was adjudged to be mentally ill. Du Pont received a sentence of 13 to 30 years, and he died in prison. The story of Schultz’s murder was dramatized in the film Foxcatcher (2014).
