Joseph H. Greenberg, in full Joseph Harold Greenberg,  (born May 28, 1915, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died May 7, 2001, Stanford, California), American anthropologist and linguist specializing in African languages and in language universals. Greenberg was the first to present a unified classification of African languages.
Having studied with Franz Boas at Columbia University (B.A., 1936), Greenberg earned a Ph.D. in anthropology (1940) from Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, where he studied with Melville J. Herskovits. He served in the U.S. Army from 1940 to 1945, then taught at the University of Minnesota (1946–48) and Columbia University (1948–62) before becoming a professor of anthropology at Stanford University (1962–85; thereafter professor emeritus). While teaching at Columbia, Greenberg published Studies in African Linguistic Classification (1955; expanded and rev. 1963 as The Languages of Africa). From the time of its publication, the work has been controversial. Some linguists consider it the most influential study on African languages, while others find Greenberg’s work to be only a modification of the earlier classification scheme of Diedrich Westermann.
Originally Greenberg posited 16 families of African languages; in the revised edition he presented only four—Niger-Kordofanian (now called Niger-Congo), Afro-Asiatic, Nilo-Saharan, and Khoisan—each of which is further subdivided. Greenberg claimed to have arrived at this conclusion by use of mass comparison, a somewhat dubious method he developed that uses similarities in vocabularies among languages to show genetic relation (the method is often criticized for building hypotheses without real evidence). Subsequent discoveries have refined some of his internal divisions, though most of his conclusions are generally accepted.
Greenberg’s studies on language universals are less controversial than his classification studies. In 1966 he published “Some Universals of Grammar with Particular Reference to the Order of Meaningful Elements.” In this article he offered 45 universals of word order and inflectional categories based on data from some 30 languages. He was among the first to deal with “implicational” universals (of the form “If A, then B”). He also edited Universals of Language (1963) and the four-volume Universals of Human Language (1978).
