José María Arguedas,  (born January 18, 1911, Andahuaylas, Peru—died November 28, 1969, Lima), Peruvian novelist, short-story writer, and ethnologist whose writings capture the contrasts between the white and Indian cultures.
Arguedas’s father was an itinerant judge. His mother, from a locally prominent family, died when he was only three years old. He was raised in part by Quechua Indians and learned to speak Quechua before he learned Spanish. As a youth he studied Quechua music and customs as well as familiarizing himself with the dominant Spanish culture. All his works reflect the tensions that underlie Peruvian society, in which the Indians, who constitute the majority of the population, are still relegated to the margins of society.
Arguedas attended the University of San Marcos in Lima, worked in the post office (1932–37), and taught at the National University in Sicuani (1939–41). After holding a series of administrative positions, he began teaching Peruvian regional cultures at the University of San Marcos in 1959. He also served as the director of the House of Culture (1963–64) and later of the National Museum of History (1964–69).
In Agua (1935; “Water”), a collection of three stories, Arguedas depicts the violent injustices and disorder of the white world as opposed to what he perceived as the peaceful and orderly existence of the exploited but passive Indians. Yawar fiesta (1941; “Bloody Feast”; Eng. trans. Yawar fiesta) treats in detail the ritual of a primitive bullfight symbolizing the social struggle of the Indians and the whites. Arguedas’s masterpiece is the novel Los ríos profundos (1958; Deep Rivers), an autobiographical work that reiterates themes previously treated. His novel El sexto (1961; “The Sixth One”) is based on his imprisonment (1937–38) during Oscar Benavides’s dictatorship. The novel Todas las sangres (“All the Races”) appeared in 1964 and was followed by an unfinished novel, El zorro de arriba y el zorro de abajo (1971; The Fox from Up Above and the Fox from Down Below), the writing of which was prescribed to him by his psychiatrist. It relates the agony of a man completely shattered and disillusioned by life. In it Arguedas methodically and passionately discusses the events leading to his final day, when he committed suicide in a deserted classroom in Lima.
