Josephine Shaw Lowell, née Josephine Shaw,  (born Dec. 16, 1843, West Roxbury, Mass., U.S.—died  Oct. 12, 1905, New York, N.Y.), American charity worker and social reformer, an advocate of the doctrine that charity should not merely relieve suffering but that it should also rehabilitate the recipient.
She was born to wealthy Bostonians who numbered among their friends such well-known figures as James Russell Lowell and Margaret Fuller. Traveling abroad with her parents for nearly five years, she attended school in Paris and Rome and completed her education in New York City and Boston. In 1863 she married Colonel Charles Russell Lowell (a nephew of James Russell Lowell), of the 2nd Massachusetts Cavalry, who was wounded at Cedar Creek, Va., and died in 1864.
Lowell’s involvement in charity concerns began after the American Civil War, when she became active in the National Freedmen’s Relief Association of New York. In 1876 she became the first woman appointed a commissioner of the New York Charities Commission, a post that she held until 1889. Her investigations there led to the establishment of the first custodial asylum for feebleminded women in the United States in 1885 and to the House of Refuge for Women (later the State Training School for Girls) in 1886. She was also responsible for the presence of matrons in police stations, a practice established in 1888.
In 1882 Lowell was a founder of the New York Charity Organization Society, a group devoted to the cooperation of charitable agencies. She guided the society for 25 years; during that time she wrote a number of papers on the theoretical foundations of relief work, especially the influential Public Relief and Private Charity (1884).
She was also a founder of the Consumers’ League of New York (1890), the Woman’s Municipal League (1894), and the Civil Service Reform Association of New York State (1895). In addition to Public Relief and Private Charity, Lowell published some 40 reports and addresses on welfare topics. She was also involved in such issues as the labour movement and the anti-imperialist movement.
