Julian Steward, in full Julian Haynes Steward,  (born January 31, 1902, Washington, D.C., U.S.—died February 6, 1972, Urbana, Illinois), American anthropologist best known as one of the leading neoevolutionists of the mid-20th century and as the founder of the theory of cultural ecology. He also did studies of the social organization of peasant villages, conducted ethnographic research among the North American Shoshone Indians and various South American Indians, and was an early proponent of area studies.
Steward received a B.A. from Cornell University in 1925 and a Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1929. He was affiliated with several universities before joining the Bureau of American Ethnology of the Smithsonian Institution in 1935. He became successively the senior anthropologist (1938) and director of the Institute of Social Anthropology (1943–46). After teaching at Columbia University (1946–52), Steward joined the faculty of the University of Illinois and became professor emeritus in 1967.
Steward’s work drew on several disciplines, including anthropology, archaeology, history, ecology, and ethnography. He was editor of the massive ethnographic study Handbook of South American Indians, 7 vol. (1946–59), a survey of cultures published by the Bureau of American Ethnology in cooperation with the U.S. Department of State.
Steward’s chief theoretical work was anthologized in Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear Evolution (1955), in which he attempted to show that social systems arise out of patterns of resource exploitation which, in turn, are determined by the technological adaptation of a people to their natural environment. Although there are cross-cultural similarities of social change, the exigencies of differing physical and historical settings produce different social manifestations in each case, resulting in what Steward called “multilinear evolution.” Similarly, his book Irrigation Civilizations (1955) illustrates how the collective labour and centralized authority required for irrigation in an arid climate resulted in increased social stratification and, ultimately, in the development of the state in various areas of the world.
