Katherine Pettit, in full Katherine Rhoda Pettit,  (born Feb. 23, 1868, near Lexington, Ky., U.S.—died Sept. 3, 1936, Lexington), American settlement worker, remembered for her extensive work among the mountain people of Kentucky to improve health and living conditions and educational opportunities.
Pettit was educated privately. In the 1890s, while working with the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union and the State Federation of Women’s Clubs, she first discovered the isolation, poverty, and hopelessness of Kentucky mountain people. From the informal distribution of flower seeds and decorative pictures to mountain women, her involvement developed into a full commitment to improve their lives. In the summer of 1899, under the aegis of the State Federation of Women’s Clubs, Pettit and a coworker established a camp on the outskirts of remote Hazard, Perry county, Kentucky, and for several weeks offered housewives instructions in healthful food preparation, gardening, and housekeeping and entertained children with songs, games, and Bible readings. They were invited to hold a similar camp, called an “Industrial,” at Hindman, Knott county, in the summer of 1900 and the following year near Sassafras, also in Knott. In 1901 they began raising funds for a permanent institution.
A fund-raising tour of eastern cities enabled them to open the Hindman School in August 1902. The school offered academic subjects in addition to crafts and domestic and industrial skills. The efforts of another coworker made medical treatment available for the endemic trachoma that had left many mountain people blind. In 1913 Pettit established the Pine Mountain Settlement School near Dillon, Harlan county, a task that she carried through from the clearing of a parcel of donated timberland to the erection of buildings from the lumber. While organizing classes and extension work, as well as clinics for the treatment of trachoma and hookworm and for dental care, she also encouraged the practice of traditional arts and crafts. She resigned as codirector of Pine Mountain Settlement School in 1930 and for the next five years traveled alone through Harlan county offering instruction and advice in farming and acting as agent for craftsmen.
Pettit published some mountain ballads from Harlan county in Journal of American Folk-Lore in 1907.
