Law of three stages,  theory of human intellectual development propounded by the French social theorist Auguste Comte (1798–1857). According to Comte, human societies moved historically from a theological stage, in which the world and the place of humans within it were explained in terms of gods, spirits, and magic; through a transitional metaphysical stage, in which such explanations were based on abstract notions such as essences and final causes (see teleology); and finally to a modern, “positive” stage based on scientific knowledge. The law of three stages was one of the two foundational ideas of Comte’s version of positivism (in general, any philosophical system that confines itself to the data of experience and excludes a priori or metaphysical speculations), the other being his thesis that the sciences emerged in strict order, beginning with mathematics and astronomy, followed by physics, chemistry, and biology, and culminating in the new science of sociology, to which Comte was the first to ascribe the name.
There is a parallel, as Comte saw it, between the evolution of thought patterns in the entire history of humankind, on the one hand, and in the history of an individual’s development from infancy to adulthood, on the other. In the first, so-called theological, stage, natural phenomena are explained as being the result of supernatural or divine powers. It matters not whether the religion is polytheistic or monotheistic; in either case, miraculous powers or wills are believed to produce the observed events. This stage was criticized by Comte as anthropomorphic—i.e., as resting on all-too-human analogies.
The second phase, called metaphysical, is in some cases merely a depersonalized theology: the observable processes of nature are assumed to arise from impersonal powers, occult qualities, vital forces, or entelechies (internal perfecting principles). In other instances, the realm of observable facts is considered as an imperfect copy or imitation of eternal forms, as in traditional interpretations of Plato’s metaphysics. Again, Comte charged that no genuine explanations result: questions concerning ultimate reality, first causes, or absolute beginnings are unanswerable. The metaphysical quest can lead only to the conclusion expressed by the German biologist and physiologist Emil du Bois-Reymond: “Ignoramus et ignorabimus” (Latin: “We are and shall be ignorant”). It is a deception through verbal devices and the fruitless rendering of concepts as real things.
The sort of fruitfulness lacking in the second phase can be achieved only in the third phase, which is scientific, or “positive”—hence the title of Comte’s magnum opus: Cours de philosophie positive (1830–42)—because it claims to be concerned only with positive facts. The task of the sciences, and of knowledge in general, is to study the facts and regularities of nature and society and to formulate the regularities as (descriptive) laws; explanations of phenomena can consist in no more than the subsuming of special cases under general laws. Humankind reached full maturity of thought only after abandoning the pseudoexplanations of the theological and metaphysical phases and substituting an unrestricted adherence to scientific method.
