League of United Latin American Citizens,  one of the oldest and largest Latino organizations in the United States. Since its founding in 1929, it has focused on education, employment, and civil rights for Hispanics.
The League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) was formally established in Corpus Christi, Texas, in February 1929. It was created through the merger of several community groups, and many of its leaders were middle-class Mexican Americans. At the time, Hispanics faced various forms of discrimination in the United States, which the organization sought to end. Often considered one of the more conservative Latino civil rights groups, LULAC initially restricted membership to U.S. citizens, made English its official language, and promoted assimilation. Its efforts included English-language instruction, assistance with citizenship requirements and exams, and scholarships for education. In addition, LULAC fought for equal treatment of Hispanics through negotiation with state and local leaders when possible but through the legal system when necessary. It was involved in such prominent cases as Mendez v. Westminster (1946), which ended the segregation of Mexican Americans in California schools. One of LULAC’s most notable initiatives was the preschool program known as the Little School of the 400, which was designed to teach children 400 basic English words. Although its presence was traditionally strongest in Texas, LULAC grew to have operations throughout the United States and in Puerto Rico.
The rise of more-radical groups in the 1960s brought changes to LULAC. It came to reject assimilation and adopted more confrontational strategies, such as public protests. The organization also sought funding from government and corporate grants. LULAC played a significant role in the creation of Operation SER (1964; Operation Service, Employment, and Redevelopment [later renamed SER-Jobs for Progress National]) and the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (1968; MALDEF). LULAC’s efforts against discrimination continued over the next four decades, and it remained active into the early 21st century.
