Lizzie Black Kander, née Lizzie Black,  (born May 28, 1858, Milwaukee, Wis., U.S.—died July 24, 1940, Milwaukee), American welfare worker who created a popular cookbook that became a highly profitable fund-raising tool for the institution she served.
Lizzie Black graduated from Milwaukee High School in 1878 and in May 1881 married Simon Kander, a businessman and local politician. From the age of 20 she was an active member of the Ladies Relief Sewing Society of Milwaukee, a group that collected and repaired discarded clothing and distributed it among poor immigrant families. She served as president of the society in 1894–95, and the next year she was chosen president of the newly organized Milwaukee Jewish Mission, whose purpose was to offer vocational and domestic training to children. In 1900 the mission joined with a similar organization, the Sisterhood of Personal Service, to establish Milwaukee’s first social settlement, known simply as “the Settlement,” of which Kander became president. With financial support from the Federated Jewish Charities of Milwaukee, the Settlement offered training in vocational and domestic skills and classes in English, American history, and music; it also established a gymnasium, organized boys’ and girls’ clubs, and otherwise served as a community centre. The cooking classes, in which Kander was personally involved, were especially popular, and to facilitate the distribution of recipes a collection of them was printed in book form in 1901 as The Settlement Cook Book: The Way to a Man’s Heart.
Advertising space was sold to finance the first edition, but the book proved to have great appeal beyond the cooking classes of the Settlement, and from the second edition it not only paid for itself but began returning profits to the Settlement. Kander continued to collect recipes from friends, teachers, and cooks around the world and to help edit subsequent editions; from 1914 she had sole editorial responsibility. By the late 1970s, when the subtitle was Treasured Recipes of Seven Decades, the book had sold more than a million copies. During Kander’s presidency the Settlement prospered greatly, and in 1911 it moved into new and larger quarters under a new name, the Abraham Lincoln House. She remained president until 1918. (Abraham Lincoln House became the Jewish Community Center in 1931.) Kander served also on the Board of School Directors of Milwaukee from 1907 to 1919 and was largely responsible for the creation of a girls’ vocational high school.
