Louisa Lee Schuyler,  (born Oct. 26, 1837, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Oct. 10, 1926, Highland Falls, N.Y.),  American welfare worker, noted for her efforts in organizing public welfare services and legislation to benefit the poor and the disabled.
As a young woman, Schuyler became interested in the work of the Children’s Aid Society of New York, which her parents supported as well. Shortly after the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, and after her mother had helped organize the Woman’s Central Association of Relief, Schuyler was named chairman of the association’s committee of correspondence. Under her guidance the association quickly developed into the largest and most effective auxiliary of the U.S. Sanitary Commission.
In 1871 Schuyler turned her mind to the problem of public charity. A visit to the poorhouse in Westchester county revealed conditions in dire need of improvement. In 1872, with a group of like-minded associates, she formed the State Charities Aid Association (SCAA), which she envisioned as an umbrella organization for local groups of volunteer visitors interested in the inspection and improvement of prisons, poorhouses, workhouses, public hospitals, and schools. While working to establish and extend the work of the SCAA and to gain the state’s formal recognition, Schuyler also devoted much time to her particular local interest, Bellevue Hospital. The most tangible result of that interest was the establishment of the Bellevue Training School for Nurses, which opened in 1873.
From 1884 until the sought-for state legislation was obtained in 1890, she led a campaign through the SCAA to have the mentally ill removed from understaffed, ill-equipped county almshouses to state hospitals. She further secured passage in 1892 of a law that provided separate accommodation and treatment for epileptics. In 1907 she was named an original trustee of the Russell Sage Foundation (see Margaret Slocum Sage). From 1908 to 1915 Schuyler worked with Winifred Holt’s New York Association for the Blind, the American Medical Association, the Russell Sage Foundation, and the SCAA to develop the National Committee (later Society) for the Prevention of Blindness. She received many honours and awards for her lifetime of service.
