Mabel Cratty,  (born June 30, 1868, Bellaire, Ohio, U.S.—died Feb. 27, 1928, New York, N.Y.), American social worker, longtime general secretary of the Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA), under whose leadership the American membership and branches of the organization increased fourfold.
Cratty studied briefly at Lake Erie Seminary (now College) and graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University in 1890. She then taught school for several years in Wheeling, West Virginia, in Kent, Ohio, and from 1892 in Delaware, Ohio, where from 1900 to 1904 she was principal of the high school. A growing interest in the work of the YWCA led to her becoming a member of the Ohio state committee of the organization in 1902.
In 1904 Cratty moved to Chicago to become associate general secretary of the American Committee of the YWCA. With the merging of the American Committee and the rival International Board in December 1906, Cratty became executive secretary of the home department under the unified National Board of the YWCA. A short time later she moved up to general secretary of the National Board, a post she retained for the rest of her life. As chief of the professional staff she bore the principal responsibility for developing and expanding the organization, and for such work she proved to be eminently suited. She was supported in everything by the president of the National Board, Grace H. Dodge, and by a rapidly growing staff, to whom she easily delegated authority and often gave credit for the work of the YWCA.
Although Cratty kept herself largely from public notice, her leadership was so effective that by 1928 the number of YWCA branches in the country had increased from fewer than 300 to more than 1,300 and its membership from some 143,000 to more than 600,000; the national staff had grown from 14 people working out of one room to 189 occupying the 12-story headquarters in New York City. One measure of Cratty’s influence was her success in keeping the YWCA in the forefront of involvement in social and internationalist issues during the disillusioned 1920s. She was also active in the work of the Camp Fire Girls, the Institute of Pacific Relations (whose 1927 conference in Honolulu she attended), the National Committee on the Cause and Cure of War (which she helped Carrie Chapman Catt organize), and other groups.
