Mary Parker Follett,  (born September 3, 1868, Quincy, Massachusetts, U.S.—died December 18, 1933, Boston, Massachusetts), American author and sociologist who was a pioneer in the study of interpersonal relations and personnel management.
Follett in 1888 entered the Society for the Collegiate Instruction of Women at Harvard, which a short time later became Radcliffe College. Before graduating in 1898, she spent a year (1890–91) at Newnham College, Cambridge, England; taught for several years at a private school in Boston; and published her first book, The Speaker of the House of Representatives (1896), a pioneering study that she had conducted with the aid of historian Albert Bushnell Hart.
After returning to Boston from further study abroad, Follett associated herself with the Roxbury Neighborhood House. In 1900 she organized the Roxbury Debating Club and in 1902 the Highland Union (a social and educational club for young men) and the Roxbury Industrial League for Boys. The Industrial League made pioneering after-hours use of community school buildings, and from 1908 to 1920 Follett headed a committee of the Women’s Municipal League of Boston devoted to developing community centres in neighbourhood schools throughout the city. She was active in the Women’s Municipal League’s work for minimum wage legislation and also with the Boston Placement Bureau and its successor from 1917, the Boston Department of Vocational Guidance.
In 1918 Follett published The New State, in which she described an organic form of democracy based on spontaneous organization along natural neighbourhood lines. Her next book, Creative Experience (1924), expanded on the social and psychological implications of her earlier work, setting forth an idealistic interpretation of individual responsibility and the creative interaction of people and groups toward a constructive synthesis of views and goals. The particular application of her ideas to industrial management and labour relations led her into a career as a lecturer, beginning with a series of papers read to the Bureau of Personnel Administration in New York City in 1925.
Follett’s books, papers, and lectures were of lasting influence on the practice of business administration, combining as they did keen insights into individual and group psychology with a knowledge of scientific management and a dedication to a broad, positive social philosophy. From 1928 she lived in London. After a series of lectures to the department of business administration of the London School of Economics in early 1933, she fell ill, and in October she returned to Boston, where she died late that year.
