Mary Morton Kimball Kehew, née Mary Morton Kimball,  (born Sept. 8, 1859, Boston, Mass., U.S.—died Feb. 13, 1918, Boston), American reformer who worked to improve the living and working conditions of mid-19th-century workingwomen in Boston, especially through labour union participation.
In 1886 Kehew joined the Women’s Educational and Industrial Union of Boston, an early and somewhat tentative association of philanthropically minded women working to ameliorate the condition of the growing population of workingwomen in Boston. Becoming a director of the union in 1890 and succeeding Abby Morton Diaz as president in January 1892, she moved forcefully to make the union a more organized and effective social tool. To the union’s employment guidance, legal aid, and similar services were soon added full courses of instruction in dressmaking (1895), housekeeping (1897), and salesmanship (1905). In 1905 a research department was organized to conduct thorough sociological studies of working and living conditions of Boston women and to help formulate legislative proposals regarding hours and wages regulation, factory inspection, and consumer protection. In 1910 an appointment bureau was formed to help place the rapidly growing numbers of college women in suitable employment.
Complementary to Kehew’s work with the union was her involvement in fostering women’s participation in labour unions. In 1892 she invited Mary Kenney (O’Sullivan), an organizer for the American Federation of Labor from Chicago, to help her form the Union for Industrial Progress, under whose auspices unions were organized among women bookbinders and laundry workers (1896), tobacco workers (1899), and needle-trade workers (1901). At the organizing convention of the National Women’s Trade Union League in Boston in 1903, Kehew was elected first president, with Jane Addams as vice president.
Among Kehew’s other activities were involvement in the establishment and operations of a number of educational and philanthropic organizations, including Simmons College, which took over some of the educational work of the Educational and Industrial Union, the Denison House settlement, the Public School Association, the Massachusetts Association for Promoting the Interests of the Blind, the Loan and Aid Society for the Blind, the Woolson House (a settlement for blind women), and The Outlook for the Blind (a magazine). Despite her avoidance of personal publicity, her energy and executive ability, together with a talent for working with people of all classes, placed her at the centre of reform and progressive activity in Boston. She remained president of the union until 1913 and was acting president and chairman of the board from 1914 until her death.
