Medical Committee for Human Rights (MCHR),  group of health care activists whose work in the late 1960s and early 1970s drew attention to inequities in health care in the United States. The MCHR was a part of the larger civil rights movement in the United States. It was formed in the summer of 1964, during the so-called Freedom Summer (Mississippi Summer Project), a campaign to increase the number of African Americans registered to vote in the state of Mississippi. The MCHR was created by a group of doctors led by American physician Robert Smith, who the year before had helped form the Medical Committee for Civil Rights and had protested against the American Medical Association (AMA) for its inaction in efforts to raise awareness of segregation in U.S. hospitals.
Initial efforts of the MCHR included providing medical support and aid for civil rights workers at marches and demonstrations and raising public awareness of issues of discrimination and segregation within health care systems in the South. Following its formal recognition as a national organization in September 1964, MCHR gained support via local affiliates in communities in both the North and the South. Its members consisted of health professionals, including doctors and nurses, as well as medical students. These individuals worked with other civil rights activists and liberal groups on behalf of the MCHR.
In 1964 the MCHR established a desegregated public health clinic in Mississippi. The increased awareness of health care inequality in the state led to substantial improvements in medical access for blacks. Studies conducted decades later concerning the state of health care in Mississippi in the 1960s and ’70s revealed the significance of the MCHR’s work. One of the most notable improvements was a dramatic reduction in the infant mortality rate among blacks, which decreased by 65 percent between 1965 and 1971. In contrast, during this same period the infant mortality rate among whites remained unchanged.
In the late 1960s increasing numbers of young doctors and students with antiwar interests joined MCHR, resulting in its drift toward the countercultural left of the 1960s and ’70s. MCHR members became active in denouncing the Vietnam War, and, as inequalities in medical care became less of an issue in the South, the group became increasingly focused on desegregating the AMA and on addressing disparities in the provision of health care nationwide. MCHR members also embarked on the development of a national health care system that was community-based and funded through a progressive national tax. Although the plan was not widely embraced at the time and ultimately failed,  the MCHR’s progressive ideologies concerning medical care in the United States did have some influence on later health care reform initiatives.
By the early 1970s many of MCHR’s original members in the health profession had abandoned the group. This occurred in part because many members were employed by state and national health organizations, leading to conflicting goals and interests within the group. In addition, disorganization within the MCHR itself, particularly the lack of effective infrastructure, and a changing political atmosphere in the United States hindered much of the group’s later work. Having lost many of its supporters throughout the 1970s to competing leftist groups such as the Progressive Labor Party, the MCHR was finally dissolved in 1980.
