Mesoamerican Indian languages, Mesoamerican also spelled Meso-American,  group of more than 125 languages classified into some 10 language families (including language isolates) that are native to Mesoamerica. The term “Mesoamerica” refers to a culture area originally defined by a number of culture traits shared among the pre-Columbian cultures of the geographical region that extends from the Pánuco River in northern Mexico to the Lempa River in El Salvador and  along the Pacific coast of Nicaragua and Costa Rica. Mesoamerica is also a linguistic area, which roughly coincides with the culture area. The term is sometimes treated as synonymous with “Middle America,” though Middle America is larger, including also all of Mexico and Central America. Mesoamerican languages are the focus of this article, although the other Middle American languages are also discussed.
The language families of Mesoamerica are Mayan, Mixe-Zoquean, Otomanguean, Tequistlatecan, Totonacan,  Uto-Aztecan, and Xinkan. The language isolates—languages with no known relatives—are Cuitlatec, Huave, and Tarascan (Purépecha). Garífuna (formerly also called Black Carib), an Arawakan (South American Indian) language, is a late arrival from the Caribbean. While most of these language families and isolates are found exclusively within Mesoamerica, Uto-Aztecan languages extend far to the north and most Arawakan languages are found in South America. The most widely accepted classification of these languages follows.
It is clear that the Huastecan branch was the first to separate off from the rest of the family. Next Yucatecan branched off, and then later the remaining Core Mayan separated into distinct branches. It appears that Cholan-Tzeltalan and Greater Q’anjob’alan belong together in a single branch, though this is not entirely certain.
Several Mayan languages have documentation beginning shortly after earliest Spanish conquest in the early 16th century.
A Mixe-Zoquean language appears have been spoken by the Olmecs.
The precise number of languages in the Zapotec complex and the Mixtec complex has not yet been determined definitively. Otomanguean languages tend to be characterized by contrastive tones, nasal vowels, mostly open syllables (that is, syllables which end in a vowel or in h or a glottal stop), and a lack of labial consonants (no p, b), though original kw became p in some languages—for example, in the Zapotec complex of languages.
Tlapanec and Subtiaba had been considered part of the large but mostly abandoned Hokan hypothesis. However, it has been determined conclusively that they belong to the Otomanguean family.
Tequistlatecan had also formerly been associated with the controversial and now mostly abandoned Hokan hypothesis.
In addition to these languages, there is a very long list of names identified in colonial and other early sources that are generally thought to represent extinct Uto-Aztecan groups, most in northern Mexico. No information has survived on most of these, and it is not certain whether they represent independent groups with their own languages or just alternative names for others already known.
Uto-Aztecan languages are distributed from Oregon to Panama. Only the Aztecan (Nahuan) branch is squarely in Mesoamerica. Cora and Huichol have some Mesoamerican traits and were influenced by Mesoamerican languages. The other languages lie outside Mesoamerica, though the members of the Southern Uto-Aztecan subfamily mostly fall within Middle America.
Xinkan and Lencan were often assumed to be related to one another, but the evidence does not support this, and the hypothesis has been abandoned.
Other non-Mesoamerican languages of Middle America, from north to south, include the following:
Huetar (Costa Rica) and Antioqueño (Colombia) are extinct languages for which the extant evidence is sufficient to demonstrate that they belong to the Chibchan family, but the evidence is not sufficient to show to which subgroup they belong.
Chibchan languages are spoken in lower Central America and northern South America, and thus several of the languages of the family do not fall within the Middle American languages.
