Moiety system, also called dual organization,   form of social organization characterized by the division of society into two complementary parts called “moieties.” Most often, moieties are groups that are exogamous, or outmarrying, that are of unilineal descent (tracing ancestry through either the male or female line, but not both), and that have complementary roles in society. For instance, members of the Raven and Wolf moieties in Tlingit culture traditionally performed certain tasks, such as preparing funerals, for each other. Moieties often reflect divisions found in the culture’s myths and folklore; the Tagaro and Supwe moieties of north Pentecost Island (Vanuatu), for instance, were named for two culture heroes and are said to bear the respective traits of each. Occasionally, if incorrectly, “moiety” is used more loosely to refer simply to one of two divisions of a society.
Moiety systems occur in two basic forms: as a feature related to but not necessarily determining the regulation of marriage, and as a system through which to divide a community into two groups for ceremonial or other purposes. Usually these functions are combined, but sometimes only one form occurs, or the two appear concurrently as separate, crosscutting systems. Thus, the Canela of South America have four dual schemes: one to regulate marriage and three to organize people into ceremonial groups. Each of these schemes bisects the tribe in a different way, because each determines membership in a different way—for instance, by lineage, by the name given a person by his maternal uncle, by the generation of his peer group, or by affiliation to one of the Canela social groups. Thus, these divisions in Canela society not only organize people into groups in which they work and socialize together but also, by ensuring that each individual knows many other members of the community, promote social cohesion.
Although moieties are often referred to interchangeably with phratries and clans, they are distinct from these phenomena. By definition, phratries comprise groups of related clans and occur in sets of three or more; moieties may, but need not, comprise groups of clans but always occur in pairs. Clans, in turn, emphasize descent from a common ancestor, while members of a moiety regard themselves as related but do not stress common descent to the same extent. Clans function frequently as landholding units and in cooperative economic enterprises; moieties do so rarely.
On a worldwide basis, matrilineal moieties (matrimoieties), which trace kinship through the female line, are far more common than patrilineal moieties (patrimoieties). Matrimoieties are generally found in association with smaller kin groups, such as lineages and clans. In all cases—whether the moieties are exogamous or not, unilineal or not, or aligned on the basis of season, geographic position, name bestowal, or other criteria—they serve to divide society into complementary groups that have reciprocal duties and rights, competition, and cooperation.
