museum of modern art,  an institution devoted to the collection, display, interpretation, and preservation of “avant-garde” or “progressive” art of the late 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries.
Museums of modern art, as they are understood today, owe their origins to the Musée du Luxembourg in Paris. Designated by Louis XVIII in 1818 as a venue for the collection and display of the work of living artists, the Musée du Luxembourg acted as a kind of testing ground for recent art to judge its worthiness for admission to the permanent collection of the state. Works acquired by the museum were kept there for a number of years after the death of the artist, at which point those works whose “glory had been confirmed by universal opinion” and that were deemed of national significance were transferred to the Louvre, while others were dispersed to regional museums.
Similar institutions and arrangements developed in Germany and Britain, among other places. In Munich, for instance, the Pinakothek (later renamed the Alte Pinakothek)—established by Louis I of Bavaria (ruled 1825–48) in 1826—was designed to display the Old Masters collection owned by the house of Wittelsbach, while the Neue Pinakothek (opened 1853) contained the collection of “modern” (that is to say, 19th-century) paintings that Louis had begun forming in 1809, while crown prince. In Britain the Tate Gallery (now the Tate Britain, one of four Tate galleries)—founded in 1897 as the National Gallery of British Art (later officially renamed the Tate Gallery in honour of Henry Tate, its initial donor) and part of the National Gallery of Art until 1954, when it formally became an independent institution—was in 1917 charged with collecting British historical art and forming a national collection of international modern art, while the National Gallery focused on art prior to 1900.
The idea of a museum devoted to modern art was given fresh impetus early in the 20th century by several pioneering directors, including Alexander Dorner in Germany and Alfred H. Barr, Jr., in the United States. Dorner, director (1925–37) of the Landesmuseum in Hanover, was deeply interested in the work of contemporary artists such as Piet Mondrian, László Moholy-Nagy, and Kazimir Malevich and sought to integrate their ideas into the Landesmuseum by inviting several of them to design displays for modern art that would fit the museum’s sequence of historical galleries. Dorner saw the museum not simply as an instrument of the Enlightenment that was designed to order and classify works of art of the past but as an “educational facility whose purpose is first to develop a taste for the subject—and secondly, and more importantly, to illustrate the developments of the human spirit in its most independent and liveliest object—in art.” It was this idea of the museum as an educational institution and a place for the discovery and interpretation of the work of contemporary artists that so influenced Barr, the founding director of the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City.
Barr traveled to Europe in 1927 to study contemporary European culture and to gather material for his intended thesis on the machine in modern art. Much of his thinking about modern art, and ultimately about MoMA, was formulated during this trip. He visited London, Rotterdam, The Hague, Amsterdam, Berlin, Moscow, Leningrad (now St. Petersburg), Warsaw, and Vienna, but he was particularly impressed by Dessau, Germany, which at that time was the home of the Bauhaus. Founded in 1919 by architect Walter Gropius, the Bauhaus was a radical school that endeavoured to teach the interdisciplinarity of the arts and crafts, including painting, textile design, architecture, and photography. Gropius brought together some of the most daring and progressive architects and artists of the day, such as Hannes Meyer, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Johannes Itten, Marianne Brandt, Oskar Schlemmer, Wassily Kandinsky, and Paul Klee, the work of all but one of whom (Meyer) would ultimately be collected by MoMA.
Barr was predisposed to the Bauhaus approach, having previously taught a course on modern art at Wellesley College that focused on painting and sculpture—as well as graphic design, decorative arts, music, literature, film, theatre, and architecture—and saw in it a model for approaching art by discipline or medium rather than by epoch or geography. The most important idea he absorbed from Dorner was that of the museum as a place of learning and discovery committed to living artists. These concepts coalesced in the Museum of Modern Art, the first museum in North America to declare itself “modern”; it identified itself with the most progressive tendencies in art, which meant work that was original and daring and challenged traditional or established canons. The museum, as Barr understood it, was to be a laboratory in which the public was invited to participate, and it was organized in its early years around departments of painting and sculpture, architecture and design, film, and photography; departments of prints and illustrated books, drawings, and media and performance art were added later.
By emphasizing innovation, MoMA was able to rapidly develop outstanding collections and inventive programs that appealed to an audience that had not been served by preexisting institutions, which paid little, if any, attention to modern art. The catalyst for this was the financial and moral support the museum received in 1929 from its founding trustees, especially Lillie P. Bliss, Mary Quinn Sullivan, and Abby Aldrich Rockefeller, who were determined to create a museum devoted exclusively to the most progressive tendencies in modern art. The museum’s success was based on its willingness to take a great deal of risk in the selection of art as well as how that art was displayed and interpreted.
The recognition that the Museum of Modern Art achieved for the artists it championed, combined with the impact of its publications and exhibitions, made it a model for other institutions in North America, Europe, Asia, and Latin America. In some cases, such as those of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (1935), the Musée National d’Art Moderne (1947; which succeeded the Musée du Luxembourg) in Paris, the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro museums of modern art (which opened within nine months of each other in 1948) in Brazil, and the Museum of Modern Art, Kamakura (1951) in Japan, entirely new museums were founded; at other institutions, such as the Art Institute of Chicago and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, new departments of modern art were created in the 1960s.
Many smaller museums of modern art were also established around this time, often based on private collections. These include the Museum Folkwang in Hagen, Germany, founded in 1902 by Karl Ernst Osthaus and moved to Essen in 1922; the Kröller-Müller State Museum in Otterlo, Netherlands, (1938), the result of a large donation from Helene Kröller-Müller; the Barnes Foundation Galleries in Merion, Pennsylvania, which housed Albert C. Barnes’s extensive collection of Impressionist, Post-Impressionist, and early Modernist masterworks and which opened to the public by appointment in 1925; the Ōhara Museum of Art in Kurashiki, outside Ōsaka, Japan, which opened to the public in 1930 and was based on Ōhara Magosaburō’s collection of 19th- and 20th-century French paintings and sculptures; and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum designed by Frank Lloyd Wright (1959) to house Guggenheim’s collection of nonobjective art.
