National Urban League,  American service agency founded for the purpose of eliminating racial segregation and discrimination and helping African Americans and other minorities to participate in all phases of American life. By the late 20th century more than 110 local affiliated groups were active throughout the United States. It is headquartered in New York City.
The Urban League traces its roots to three organizations—the Committee for the Improvement of Industrial Conditions Among Negroes in New York (founded in 1906), the National League for the Protection of Colored Women (founded 1906), and the Committee on Urban Conditions Among Negroes (founded 1910)—that merged in 1911 to form the National League on Urban Conditions Among Negroes. The new organization sought to help African Americans, especially those moving to New York City from rural locations in the South (see Great Migration), to find jobs and housing and generally to adjust to urban life. The model organization established in New York City was imitated in other cities where affiliates were soon established. By 1920 the national organization had assumed the shorter name, National Urban League.
From its founding, the league has been interracial; the organization’s very establishment was led by George Edmund Haynes, the first African American to earn a Ph.D. from Columbia University, and Ruth Standish Baldwin, a white New York City philanthropist. The Urban League’s primary task of helping migrants gradually evolved over the years into larger concerns. The organization emphasized employment rights for African Americans during the directorship of Eugene Kinckle Jones (1918–41); his successor, Lester Granger (1941–61), emphasized jobs for African Americans in the defense industry and attempted to breech the colour barrier prevalent in labour unions during World War II. It was during the presidency of Whitney M. Young, Jr. (1961–71), that the league emerged as one of the strongest forces in the American civil rights struggle. Under his successor, Vernon E. Jordan, Jr. (1971–81), the league broadened its vision by embracing such causes as environmental protection, energy conservation, and the general problems of poverty. The league’s interests at the turn of the 21st century included the concept of achievement as it relates to racial identity, international issues such as globalization and its economic effects on the African American community, and education.
