Nationality,   in law, membership in a nation or sovereign state. It is to be distinguished from citizenship (q.v.), a somewhat narrower term that is sometimes used to denote the status of those nationals who have full political privileges. Before an act of the U.S. Congress made them citizens, for example, American Indians were sometimes referred to as “noncitizen nationals.”
Individuals, companies (corporations), ships, and aircraft all have nationality for legal purposes. It is in reference to natural persons, however, that the term finds most frequent use. Nationality is in fact commonly regarded as an inalienable right of every human being. Thus, the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) states that “everyone has the right to a nationality” and that “no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality.” Nationality is of cardinal importance because it is mainly through nationality that the individual comes within the scope of international law and has access to the political and economic rights and privileges conferred by modern states on their nationals.
The state, through constitutional and statutory provisions, sets the criteria for determining who shall be its nationals. The right of a state to confer its nationality is, however, not unlimited, for otherwise it might impinge upon other states’ rights to determine what persons shall be their nationals. By one rule of international customary law, a person who is born within a state’s territory and subject to its jurisdiction acquires that state’s nationality by the fact of such birth. By another rule, one has a nationality as an inheritance from one or both of one’s parents. States vary in the use of the two principles.
When one state cedes territory to another, inhabitants of the region that is ceded commonly have an opportunity to acquire that state’s nationality. Practice, however, supports the idea that the individuals concerned should be allowed a free choice. Another method of acquiring nationality is through the process of naturalization (q.v.).
In international law, nationality assumes significance in a variety of circumstances. In extradition treaties, for example, states include clauses making it optional for them to surrender their own nationals. If a state expels a person from its territory, only the state of which the person is a national is obligated to receive him.
Differences in national legislation and the absence of universally binding laws or practices have given rise to a number of unsettled questions on nationality; these include the problem of dual or multiple nationality and the problem of stateless persons—that is, persons having no nationality. 
