National Organization for Men Against Sexism (NOMAS), formerly (1983–1990) National Organization for Changing Men,  the oldest antisexist men’s organization in the United States, advocating for feminist causes. NOMAS began as a loose coalition of pro-feminist men in the 1970s, and its members initially advocated for feminist causes specifically related to issues of violence against women. Though the organization still promotes consciousness raising, NOMAS has evolved into a political activist group concerned with institutional and legal policies and procedures. NOMAS cooperates with a diverse array of members to effect change in institutions and ideologies that maintain inequality between men and women.
Although in the 19th century men like British philosopher John Stuart Mill, American human-rights leader Frederick Douglass, and others promoted gender-egalitarian attitudes, it was not until the late 1960s that there was a drastic increase in male feminists. In 1975 several young men at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville enrolled in a women’s-studies course and held a conference the following year, which they dubbed the First National Conference on Men and Masculinity (M&M). This spawned interest in the idea of pro-feminist men, and M&M conferences began to be held in other states. In those first years a pro-feminist position emerged organically from the membership, as there was very little organization to the group. The group supported gay rights and was predominantly concerned with the constraints placed on men as a result of “sex role restrictions” and with how feminism could enrich the lives of both men and women.
As antifeminist and “men’s rights” groups grew more vocal in the late 1970s, it became clear that further organization of the M&M attendees would be necessary for the group to persist. At the 1981 M&M conference in Boston, a national membership organization was formed, and a collective leadership council followed in 1982. In 1983 the organization was named the National Organization for Changing Men (NOCM), but in 1990 it was renamed NOMAS to better reflect its egalitarian position. The group has national task forces in support of issues such as reproductive rights, fathering, child custody, and men’s health, and it advocates against sexism, homophobia, sexual harassment, domestic violence, racism, and classism.
