National Rifle Association of America (NRA),  leading gun rights organization in the United States. The National Rifle Association of America (NRA) was founded in New York state in 1871 as a governing body for the sport of shooting with rifles and pistols. By the early 21st century it claimed a membership of nearly five million target shooters, hunters, gun collectors, gunsmiths, police, and other gun enthusiasts.
Among the NRA’s more important activities beginning in the second half of the 20th century was its highly effective political lobbying and campaigning against virtually any legislative proposal for the control of firearms. It consistently characterized such measures as infringements of the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and a grave threat to individual liberty, maintaining that stance even in the wake of frequent mass shootings throughout the country (e.g., the Newtown shootings of 2012 and the Orlando shooting of 2016). Although the NRA typically declined to issue public statements following mass murders committed with guns, it has asserted that gun-control measures would not have prevented the violence, that mass shootings could have been avoided or mitigated if more bystanders or victims had carried guns with which to intervene or defend themselves, and that such tragedies are simply the price that must be paid for the freedom guaranteed by the Second Amendment.
Following the publication in 1993 of a study funded by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) showing that gun ownership increased the risk of homicide in the home, the NRA successfully lobbied Congress to reallocate the CDC’s budget for research on gun violence and to adopt a law, known as the Dickey amendment, that prohibited the CDC from using research funds to “advocate or promote gun control.” The amendment effectively prevented the CDC from funding research on gun violence in subsequent years.
In 2018 Oliver North, a former U.S. Marine Corps officer who was a central figure in the Iran-Contra Affair of the 1980s, was named president of the NRA. He soon became involved in a power struggle with NRA chief executive officer Wayne LaPierre as regulators investigated the organization’s tax-exempt status amid allegations of financial improprieties. In 2019 North announced that he was resigning as president, noting that the NRA was in the midst of a “clear crisis.”
In 2020 the New York state attorney general filed a lawsuit seeking to dissolve the NRA on the grounds that LaPierre and other top officials had improperly used NRA assets to enrich themselves and their associates and to fund extravagant personal expenses in violation of state and federal laws governing nonprofit or charitable organizations. In 2021 the NRA declared bankruptcy and announced that it would reincorporate in Texas. However, later that year a federal judge dismissed the filing, stating that “the N.R.A. is using this bankruptcy case to address a regulatory enforcement problem, not a financial one.” The decision meant that the New York lawsuit would continue.
The American NRA was modeled after the National Rifle Association in Great Britain, which had been formed in 1859. The British NRA has its headquarters near Woking, Surrey, England, and the American NRA is headquartered in Fairfax, Virginia.
