Neighbourhood association, also called community association,  organized group whose aim is to address local issues, such as education reform, crime, or homelessness, to promote or prevent planned reforms and investments that are perceived as significantly influencing life in a neighbourhood or local community.
Neighbourhood associations strengthen the link between residents and policy makers. They mobilize residents into political activism and create opportunities for direct communication within the local community and between the local residents and local officials. Unlike professional, lifestyle, or interest-focused associations that group individuals by their occupational characteristics or similar lifestyle or interests, neighbourhood associations group individuals that share concern for the good of the local community.
Research shows that while citizens’ participation in most types of voluntary organizations is beneficial for the quality of democratic government, neighbourhood associations have a particularly positive influence on the functioning of political and economic institutions. Neighbourhood associations act as “schools of democracy,” in which citizens are socialized into activism and political participation. They facilitate communication between various local actors and institutions and stimulate articulation of citizens’ interests and expectations. They contribute to the emergence of the sense of community among local residents. They increase individuals’ and communities’ civic capacity. As a result, neighbourhood associations contribute to the empowerment of neighbourhood communities and lay the groundwork for local and national policy efforts.
Individuals with larger resources (such as skills and money) are more likely to join voluntary associations, but research shows that neighbourhood associations that have more resources are less active than less-affluent associations. However, that may be due to the fact that they operate in wealthier areas facing fewer social problems, thus requiring less action on their part. It may also be a result of replacing a needs-driven approach, focusing on the problems of a local community, with an asset-based approach that concentrates on utilizing the strengths of even deprived communities and thus on transforming “clients into citizens.”
The late 20th century brought a widespread concern about the loss of community in modern Western societies. Anonymity of urban environments, technological advances, and increased mobility are among the main factors blamed for the erosion of formal and informal networks among local residents. Therefore, in attempts to create opportunities for the emergence and development of neighbourhood initiatives, governmental and nongovernmental agencies promote policies aimed at improving the quality of life in local communities and strengthening citizens’ links with their neighbourhoods.
