Nilo-Saharan languages,  a group of languages that form one of the four language stocks or families on the African continent, the others being Afro-Asiatic, Khoisan, and Niger-Congo. The Nilo-Saharan languages are presumed to be descended from a common ancestral language and, therefore, to be genetically related. The family covers major areas east and north of Lake Victoria in East Africa and extends westward as far as the Niger valley in Mali, West Africa. Its genetic unity was first proposed in a classificatory study dating from 1963 by the American linguist and anthropologist Joseph H. Greenberg.
Whereas the first grammars of African languages probably date to the 17th century, it was especially during the 19th century that European missionaries and explorers set out to study the vast number of languages on the continent. The same era saw the commencement of comparative studies in which the historical relationships between these languages became a central issue. The German Egyptologist Karl Richard Lepsius, for example, arrived at a three-way classification of the languages on the continent: a northern zone, a middle zone, and a southern zone. But, whereas in the case of the West African members of the so-called middle zone (also referred to as “Sudanic,” after the Arabic expression for “the lands of the blacks”) clear-cut evidence for genetic relationship was gradually forthcoming during the next decades, several central as well as the eastern representatives did not fit in easily with the rest. As the eminent German Africanist Diedrich Westermann observed in a number of studies he published in the 1920s and ’30s, languages of this Sudanic belt were of two kinds: those languages of western and south-central Africa that showed affinities with languages in southern Africa (the latter had come to be known as Bantu languages) and those in the north-central and eastern parts of the continent that did not. This led Westermann to postulate three groups of so-called Sudanic languages: Western Sudanic, Central Sudanic, and Eastern Sudanic.
In a groundbreaking comparative study of African languages that was published in a series of articles between 1949 and 1954 and reprinted in book form in 1955, Greenberg postulated the existence of a new family he termed Macro-Sudanic. Because many of the languages included in this family were located in the watersheds of the Chari and Nile rivers or in the areas between them, the name Macro-Sudanic was subsequently changed to Chari-Nile. This new name helped to distinguish Greenberg’s grouping from the Sudanic of some of Greenberg’s intellectual predecessors. Greenberg’s Chari-Nile family included, among others, a Central Sudanic and an Eastern Sudanic branch. The latter were coterminous with, but not entirely identical to, Westermann’s Central Sudanic and Eastern Sudanic groups, since specific languages and language groups had been added or excluded from these groups by Greenberg. In his classificatory work, Greenberg further followed the lead of scholars such as Margaret A. Bryan, Carlo Conti Rossini, Sir Harry Johnston, Johannes Lukas, G.W. Murray, Roland C. Stevenson, and Archibald N. Tucker, whose pioneering descriptive and comparative work had resulted in more detailed knowledge of the language map of eastern and central Africa.
In a follow-up study published in 1963, purporting to be a new and comprehensive genetic classification of African languages, Greenberg postulated the Nilo-Saharan family. This superstock was essentially the earlier Chari-Nile family together with certain languages or groups formerly assigned to independent and historically isolated units. The Chari-Nile designation is now considered obsolete. In addition to Kunama, Berta, and the Eastern Sudanic and Central Sudanic languages (once in the Chari-Nile group), most scholars now consider Nilo-Saharan to include Songhai, Saharan, Maban, Komuz, and Fur.
A further reclassification in terms of genetic affiliation, also made possible as a result of improved knowledge, occurred with respect to a group of languages known as Kadu (or Kadugli-Krongo, formerly Tumtum) spoken in the Nuba Hills of Sudan. Its Nilo-Saharan affiliation is now widely accepted. In Greenberg’s 1963 comparative study of African languages, however, the Kadu languages had been classified as Kordofanian—a branch of Niger-Congo—although it had already been pointed out that this group showed considerable divergence from the rest.
Designations and classifications of the Nilo-Saharan languages are provided in the table.
The postulated genetic unity of Nilo-Saharan is now widely accepted, but its internal classification, and especially the integrity of larger units proposed by Greenberg, such as Eastern Sudanic, has been questioned. Overall historical-comparative work in the strict sense, using Neogrammarian notions of regular sound correspondences between cognate forms in related languages and notions of shared innovations in order to arrive at proper subclassifications (as developed in the comparative study of Indo-European languages), is still lacking for the family as a whole. Considerable progress has been made, however, in the comparative study of several well-established lower-level units such as Nilotic, Nubian, and Saharan. These studies have revealed such additional information as a closer historical affinity between certain branches—for example, between the Nilotic and Surmic and the Nubian and Taman groups.
A number of scholars have suggested that Nilo-Saharan forms a larger genetic unit with Niger-Congo. Some scholars also have argued that the Meroitic language—which survives only in inscriptions, as it became extinct after the Meroe kingdom (or kingdom of Cush [Kush]) fell to the expanding Ethiopian empire of Aksum in the 4th century ce—belongs to the Nilo-Saharan family.
