Organization theory,  a large and multidisciplinary body of scholarly work that focuses on understanding organizations.
Most of the work in organization theory has been written by scholars in the disciplines of sociology, business management, and economics. They have focused most of their attention on analyzing and theorizing about business firms and, more recently, associations and nonprofit organizations. Organization-theory literature is primarily concerned with explaining organizational structure, performance, and survival. Scholars in this field have aimed at developing a general theory of organization and analytical tools that are designed to apply to all types of formal organizations, including those in the public sector.
Max Weber’s groundbreaking analysis of bureaucracy inspired the growth of a major subfield within sociology focusing on formal organizations. In economics and business management, in the early part of the 20th century, scholars began studying the modern business firm. The goal was partly to understand its role in the economy, but much of the focus was on helping managers run firms more efficiently and effectively. Over time, organization theory emerged as a coherent multidisciplinary field of research. Scholars in that field consistently aimed at crafting a general theory of organization, a science of organizations that applies equally well to all sorts of formal organizations. A key assumption in the field was that there is no fundamental difference between public and private organizations. However, the sociologists, business-school professors, and economists that dominated organization theory focused most of their empirical research on business firms in the United States. Thus, it remained a matter of debate how well those theories applied to public organizations.
Organization theory is focused on understanding how organizations work, why they come to be structured in particular ways, and why some organizations are more successful than others. Researchers have addressed those questions by employing a variety of units of analysis. One strand of research examines individual organizations—looking, for example, at how internal structure or organizational culture affects performance. Another strand focuses on relationships between organizations, examining interactions either between a small number of organizations or within a specific “field” of mutually interdependent organizations. That view allows one to understand, for example, how powerful organizations shape others within a field and how organizations come to rely on one another. Other research looks at entire populations of organizations, using statistical tools to see how a population changes over time as some organizations flourish and others die. Overall, a large proportion of work in organization theory centres on organizational relationships and the interaction between an individual organization and its external environment.
Three perspectives appear to be dominant in organization theory. The rational system perspective focuses on the formal structures of an organization and sees the organization as a group of people who work together to pursue specific goals. The natural system perspective advances the idea that informal and interpersonal structures within an organization are more important than formal structures. People within an organization have multiple interests, and consensus-building or conflictual processes drive organizational action. Last, the open-system perspective argues that one cannot look at an individual organization in isolation. In that view, organizations are intertwined with their environments to the extent that the organization-environment boundary is indistinct.
Likewise, three dominant debates or issues are dominant within the field of organization theory. The first concerns whether efficiency and the quest for efficiency are the main determinants of organizational structure, performance, and persistence. Whereas some maintain that the most-efficient organizations persist and prosper, others argue that organizations can succeed through the use of other strategies. For example, an organization may do well because it is perceived to have great legitimacy or because it has formed alliances with powerful actors. A second debate concerns the degree to which organizations can actively change or co-opt their environment. Does the environment represent a “hard” structure to which organizations must adapt or die, or is the environment malleable, making it possible for organizations to manipulate it? A last debate focuses on the question of whether organizations are able to adapt in the face of environmental change. Although some research has demonstrated that managers can change their organizations in the face of challenges, other research suggests that it is rare for adaptation to be carried out successfully.
