Path dependence,  the tendency of institutions or technologies to become committed to develop in certain ways as a result of their structural properties or their beliefs and values.
As a theory, path dependence is based on the straightforward assumption that “history matters.” It attempts to explain exactly how history matters through studies of the means by which constraints on normal behaviour appear and of the form that those constraints take. Path dependence theory has been applied to a wide variety of phenomena, ranging from the persistence of the QWERTY keyboard (despite its suboptimality in terms of typing speed) to policy changes in health care and welfare systems.
Path dependence is often used in studies based on the historical-institutionalist approach to political science, which focuses on how institutions come to constrain organizational life. It has become a key concept in explanations of why institutions in political life do not change as much as might be expected. Path dependence tends to suggest that policy makers work within a series of limited assumptions about their world, that they frequently fail to learn from past experience, and that they emphasize caution in their decision-making processes.
Studies of path dependence demonstrate that politics is often subject to considerable inertia. Studies of the welfare state, for example, have suggested that significant changes in policy or procedure can be effected only in exceptional situations. Similarly, studies of how technologies become path-dependent suggest that externalities resulting from supplier and customer preferences can lead to the dominance of one particular technology over another, even if the technology that “loses” is superior.
A system (e.g., an institution or a technology) can be shown to be path-dependent by identifying three essential elements. First, it must be demonstrated that, at the creation of the institution or technology under study, a contingency or series of contingencies occurred that led to the selection of one outcome over another, which, given another set of initial conditions, might have led to another outcome having been selected instead. In other words, there must be a strong element of contingency in the model; chance can end up as a deciding factor. Second, it must be demonstrated how a new technology or organizational form becomes insulated to some extent from change. The factors involved in that insulation, or feedback mechanisms, may be positive (supporting advocates of the path-dependent institution or technology) or negative (interfering with attempts at change from advocates of alternative institutions or technologies).
The feedback mechanisms that lock in the system under investigation along a particular path might be either cognitive or institutional. In the former case, policy makers come to see the world only through the perspective of a particular idea, ignoring elements that do not conform to it. In the latter case, properties of institutions constrain actors within them so that they are unable to act in particular ways, even if they are not subject to cognitive limitations. The foregoing is not to suggest that path-dependent institutions are “stupid”—i.e., unable to react to changes in their environments in rational ways. Rather, their behaviour may be extremely sophisticated, in certain ways, but only within defined behavioral limits. Path dependence suggests that human behaviour has limits, both cognitive and institutional, which have profound implications for politics and decision making in general.
Finally, it must be demonstrated how change within a path-dependent system is possible, given the feedback mechanisms identified in the second stage of the analysis. For example, the analyst might examine the system under investigation for contradictions or problems that might eventually lead to the establishment of a new policy or technology pathway.
