Paul Radin,  (born April 2, 1883, Łódź, Pol.—died  Feb. 21, 1959, New York City), U.S. anthropologist who was influential in advancing a historical model of social structures based on a synthesis of approaches, including social theory, economics, religion, philosophy, and psychology. He pioneered in such important fields of anthropology as culture-personality studies and the use of autobiographical documents. An accomplished linguist, he described a number of North American languages and advanced a classification scheme emphasizing their unity.
Radin’s outlook was influenced by the skeptical humanism of U.S. historian James Harvey Robinson and the views of anthropologist Franz Boas. Radin took his Ph.D. at Columbia University in 1911. He made his first field study among the Winnebago Indians of Wisconsin (1908) and, starting with The Winnebago Tribe (1915–16), eventually treated nearly every aspect of their culture. The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian (1920; retitled Crashing Thunder, 1926) exemplifies his use of autobiographical documents as do The Road of Life and Death (1945) and The Culture of the Winnebago: As Described by Themselves (1949). For many years a field anthropologist for the geological survey of Canada, Radin also taught at various times at several universities, including California (Berkeley), Chicago, Cambridge, and Brandeis (Waltham, Mass.).
Radin was interested in the folklore, religion, and language of peoples who were then called “primitive,” whose mentality he viewed as different in degree, but not in kind, from that of their industrialized and urbanized contemporaries. He considered their responses to life’s main challenges to be profound, sophisticated, and comprehensible, and he was generally skeptical of notions of progress in moral awareness.
Over the years Radin wrote a number of significant works. His major linguistic contribution is The Genetic Relationship of the North American Indian Languages (1919). He contrasts two historical temperamental types in Primitive Man as Philosopher (1927) and Primitive Religion (1938). His principal critical–theoretical work is thought to be Method and Theory of Ethnology (1933). Radin’s ideas attracted the interest of such diverse individuals as sociologist Lewis Mumford, psychoanalyst Carl Jung, poet John Crowe Ransom, and philosopher John Dewey.
