Reed Erickson, original name Rita Alma Erickson,  (born October 13, 1917, El Paso, Texas, U.S.—died January 3, 1992, Mexico), transgender philanthropist who helped to fund early research on transsexual and transgender issues and to increase the visibility of transsexuality in the United States.
Rita Erickson grew up in Philadelphia and graduated from the Philadelphia High School for Girls. Erickson briefly attended Temple University before moving with Erickson’s family to Baton Rouge, Louisiana, where Erickson enrolled at Louisiana State University (LSU), becoming the first woman graduate of LSU’s school of engineering.  Shortly after taking over Erickson’s father’s prosperous lead-smelting business after his death in 1962, Erickson began a process of masculinization under the supervision of Dr. Harry Benjamin, an endocrinologist, who created the first medical standard of care for transsexuals.
In 1964 Erickson founded the Erickson Educational Foundation (EEF), an organization through which Erickson funneled philanthropic donations. Through the EEF, Erickson supported significant early studies of transsexualism by Benjamin and other scholars and doctors, including many researchers at Johns Hopkins University and Stanford University. In the 1960s and early ’70s, the EEF donated more than $250,000 to the improvement of medical services for transsexuals. The EEF also promoted education on transsexuality and transgender issues through coordinating medical referrals among transsexuals, sponsoring public educational events, and funding early books about transsexuality. Most importantly, the EEF supported the growth and development of the Harry Benjamin International Gender Dysphoria Association (later renamed the World Professional Association for Transgender Health) through financial contributions and sponsorship of the first three international symposia on gender identity in 1969, 1971, and 1973.
Erickson made significant donations to ONE Inc., a Los Angeles-based educational and support organization for gays and lesbians, founded in 1952. He also funded New Age-inspired exploratory research on dolphin communication, acupuncture, and dreams. After transitioning to his male identity, Erickson married three times and fathered two children. By the 1970s Erickson had developed a dependency on illegal drugs. After a series of arrests for drug possession in the mid-1980s, he fled to Mexico, where he remained a fugitive until his death.
