Residence,  in anthropology, the location of a domicile, particularly after marriage. Residence has been an important area of investigation because it is a locus where biological (consanguineal) and marital (affinal) forms of kinship combine.
In traditional cultures, residence practices generally follow established customs. If newlyweds establish a home independent of the location of either set of parents, they are said to establish neolocal residence. If they live with or near the kin of the husband, they follow the rule of patrilocality or virilocal residence; if they live with or near the kin of the wife, the residence is said to be matrilocal or uxorilocal. When the couple alternates between the wife’s group and the husband’s group, their household arrangements are called bilocal residence.
These postmarital residence patterns hold even when partners dwell apart much of the time. For instance, among some traditional American Arctic peoples, adult men reside in a communal men’s house while women and their children reside in smaller individual homes. Similarly, in some traditional South American Indian communities a large men’s house is complemented by one or more large houses in which women and their children dwell communally. In such cases, residence is reckoned at the level of the hamlet or village rather than the household.
Cultures that practice the avunculate, a custom in which children have a special relationship with their mother’s brothers, may follow an avunculocal residence system. In such systems, boys leave their natal home during adolescence and join the household of one of their maternal uncles. When the boy marries, his wife joins him as a member of the uncle’s residence group. Hence, an avunculocal household might include a senior married couple (or cowives and their husband), their unmarried daughters and preadolescent sons, and the husband’s nephews and their wives, preadolescent sons, and daughters. Notably, cultures that practice the avunculate often enjoin cross-cousin marriage, in which one marries the child of one’s mother’s brother or father’s sister. In other words, avunculocal societies encourage pairing between a daughter and her father’s nephew.
Whatever the preferred form of residence, its establishment after marriage signifies the potential severance of old alignments in favour of new ones. When such a move necessitates that one person live with relatives acquired through marriage, the new situation may place him or her at least temporarily at an emotional disadvantage. This is particularly the case when the residence is a considerable distance from the individual’s natal home, a situation that may also leave the person at greater risk for psychological or physical abuse. To some extent, marital exchanges such as bridewealth and dowry are intended to protect the person who has to leave the natal residence.
