Sir Moses Montefiore, Baronet, in full Sir Moses Haim Montefiore, Baronet,  (born October 24, 1784, Livorno [Italy]—died July 28, 1885, near Ramsgate, Kent, England), Italian-born businessman who was noted for his philanthropy and support of Jewish rights.
Scion of an old Italian Jewish merchant family, Montefiore was taken to England as an infant. As a young man, he accumulated such a fortune on the London stock exchange that he was able to retire in 1824. He subsequently helped found the Alliance Assurance Company, the Imperial Continental Gas Association (which pioneered gas lighting for homes), and the Provincial Bank of Ireland.
In 1837 he was elected sheriff of London, the second Jew so honoured, and in 1847 he became high sheriff of Kent. He was knighted in 1837 and became a baronet in 1846.
An Orthodox Sefardic Jew (a Jew of Portuguese-Spanish descent), Montefiore is best remembered as a philanthropist and as a zealous fighter for the rights of oppressed Jews all over the world. Besides visiting such countries as Italy, Russia, and Romania on behalf of his co-religionists, he also made seven journeys to Palestine. During his first pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1827 he established a friendship with Muḥammad ʿAlī Pasha, sultan of Egypt. In 1840 Montefiore utilized this relationship when he helped secure the release of a number of Damascan Jews (Damascus was then part of ʿAlī’s domain) who had been falsely accused of using Christian blood for religious rites. That year he also persuaded the Turkish sultan to extend to Jews the maximum privileges enjoyed by aliens, privileges he persuaded a later sultan to reaffirm in 1863. In Russia he convinced Tsar Nicholas I to rescind a decree of 1844 that had ordered all Jews to withdraw from the western frontier areas of Russia. In addition he performed a great many private acts of charity, and he contributed a fortune to establish hospitals and charitable institutions in Palestine.
Montefiore made a final pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 1875 and retired thereafter to his house, East Cliff Lodge, where he maintained a centre of religious observance and theological research. Though married, he died without issue, and the baronetcy became extinct.
