Sister Simone Campbell,  (born October 22, 1945, Santa Monica, California, U.S.), American Roman Catholic sister, attorney, and poet known as an outspoken advocate for social justice.
Campbell took her religious vows (first vows 1967; final vows 1973) after joining the Sisters of Social Service (1964), an international Roman Catholic community rooted in the Benedictine tradition. She received a bachelor’s degree (1969) from Mount St. Mary’s College, Los Angeles, and a doctorate in law (1977) from the University of California, Davis, where she was the editor of the UC Davis Law Review. She was the founder and lead attorney for the Community Law Center in Oakland, California (1978–95). As general director of the Sisters of Social Service (1995–2000), she oversaw the activities of her religious community in the United States, Mexico, Taiwan, and the Philippines. She gained national exposure as the executive director of Jericho (2002–04), an interfaith interest group advocating on behalf of the poor, and of Network (2004–21), a Roman Catholic group promoting social justice in public policy. In that capacity Campbell took an active though informal role in the Leadership Conference of Women Religious (LCWR), a coalition representing the majority of American sisters. Campbell was also active on international issues and took part in religious delegations to Chiapas, Mexico (1996), Iraq (2002), Syria (2008), and Lebanon (2008).
In 2012 when the Vatican announced that it was investigating the LCWR regarding its respect for or departure from established Catholic teaching, Campbell became one of the main public figures among American sisters in their disagreement with the Roman Catholic Church’s hierarchy. The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, the Vatican office responsible for upholding doctrinal discipline within the church, released a report that found discrepancies between basic Catholic doctrine and the teaching and actions of the LCWR, particularly on the issues of same-sex marriage and abortion, and ordered the LCWR to revise its statutes. Campbell rejected the report and argued that the sisters’ work for social justice actually manifested their fidelity to the gospel. She characterized the disagreement between the Vatican and the sisters as a divergence of political culture rather than of faith.
In the summer of 2012, Campbell led Nuns on the Bus, a two-week tour across the United States organized by Network. During that tour the sisters criticized the Republican federal budget proposal for 2012–13 as unpatriotic and immoral. In September 2012 Campbell addressed the Democratic National Convention. She denounced the Republican budget proposal for failing to acknowledge mutual responsibility as a moral duty and characterized her support of health care reform as part of her pro-life stance. In 2017 she also spoke out against the Republican tax plan, arguing that it would cause wealth inequality to widen.
Campbell’s autobiography, A Nun on the Bus: How All of Us Can Create Hope, Change, and Community, was published in 2014.
