Social settlement, also called settlement house, community centre, or neighbourhood house,  a neighbourhood social welfare agency. The main purpose of a social settlement is the development and improvement of a neighbourhood or cluster of neighbourhoods. It differs from other social agencies in being concerned with neighbourhood life as a whole rather than with providing selected social services. The staff members of a social settlement work with individuals and families and with groups. They do informal counseling and home visiting. They sponsor friendship clubs, classes, athletic teams, and interest or hobby groups. Where problems are such that specialized skill is needed, caseworkers, psychologists, psychiatrists, home economists, and vocational counselors may be employed.
The settlement movement began with the founding of Toynbee Hall in London in 1884. Samuel Augustus Barnett, then vicar of St. Jude’s Parish, invited a number of university students to join him and his wife in “settling” in a deprived area of the city. The movement spread to the United States when Charles B. Stover and an American lecturer at the West London Ethical Society, Stanton Coit, an early visitor to Toynbee Hall, established Neighborhood Guild, now University Settlement, on the Lower East Side of New York City in 1886. In Chicago in 1889, Jane Addams bought a residence on the West Side that came to be known as Hull House. In that same year the educator Jane E. Robbins and Jean Fine (Mrs. Charles B. Spahr) opened the College Settlement in New York City. Two years later Robert A. Woods, another resident of Toynbee Hall, and William J. Tucker established Andover House, later called South End House, in Boston. The movement then spread to most countries of western Europe and to Southeast Asia and Japan.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, American settlement houses were especially active among the masses of new immigrants and led in movements toward such reforms as legislation providing for juvenile courts, mothers’ pensions, workers’ compensation, and the regulation of child labour.
Most countries have national organizations, such as the National Federation of Settlements and Neighborhood Centers in the United States and the British Association of Settlements and Social Action Centres in Great Britain. The first international Conference of Settlement Workers, held in London in 1922, led to the organization in 1926 of the International Federation of Settlements and Neighborhood Centers (IFS). The IFS maintains consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
