Social capital,  concept in social science that involves the potential of individuals to secure benefits and invent solutions to problems through membership in social networks. Social capital revolves around three dimensions: interconnected networks of relationships between individuals and groups (social ties or social participation), levels of trust that characterize these ties, and resources or benefits that are both gained and transferred by virtue of social ties and social participation.
A high degree of trust among network participants fosters a sense of mutual obligation and permits them to be more effective in pursuing shared objectives. Social participation may take place in political, civil, or religious arenas or even in the workplace. Additionally, scholars assign great significance to building social capital through informal social ties such as interactions with family, friends, and neighbors. Social capital is also enhanced through network closure—when individuals know each other in several capacities, for example, as neighbors, business partners, parents of same-age children, and so on.
Social capital has been shown to be of great importance for societal well-being. Studies have found that levels of social capital are related to levels of employment in communities, academic performance, individual physical health, economic growth, and immigrant and ethnic enterprise. In addition, it has been demonstrated that greater levels of social capital correspond to lower crime rates in the community. Social disorganization theory is useful in helping explain the relationship between social capital and crime. In brief, structural disadvantages like economic deprivation, high residential mobility, and population heterogeneity hinder the ability of residents to be proactive for the benefit of their community and exert effective social control. When communities are socially fragmented, they are characterized by a low degree of social participation and mutual trust. Truncated social networks are not conducive to formulating and enforcing clear definitions and ideas about the values, problems, and needs of the community, and they may in fact weaken supervision, guardianship, and other types of informal social control.
Recent research has pointed out that social capital can also be associated with some negative characteristics. Though some forms of social capital have positive outcomes for certain social groups, the same forms can adversely affect other groups. Although tightly knit networks make possible the achievement of certain ends for their members, this inner cohesion may restrict entry and deny benefits to nonmembers. Strong bonding may also produce excessive social pressure for conformity, thus undermining personal freedoms. Members forming the majority have an opportunity to fulfill their own agenda, whereas individuals who fail to obey the rules can find themselves in the position of outsiders.
