Song Qingling, Wade-Giles romanization Sung Ch’ing-ling, Song also spelled Soong,  (born January 27, 1893, Shanghai, China—died May 29, 1981, Beijing), second wife of the Chinese revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen (Sun Zhongshan). She became an influential political figure in China after her husband’s death.
A member of the prominent Soong family, Song Qingling was educated in the United States. She married Sun Yat-sen, who was 26 years her senior, in 1914. After Sun’s death in 1925, Song Qingling assumed an active role in politics. She supported the left wing of the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, which had been founded by Sun) when it split with the right wing of the party, later headed by Chiang Kai-shek. In 1927, when the left-wing Nationalists purged their communist members and reunited with the right-wing Nationalists, she denounced the organization as having betrayed the ideals of her husband, and she left China for the Soviet Union, where she remained for two years.
After the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War in 1937, Song Qingling organized the China Defense League, which did medical and child welfare work, especially in the communist-controlled areas of the country. During that period she also became temporarily reunited with her sister Soong Mei-ling (the wife of Chiang Kai-shek) and her brother T.V. Soong, one of China’s leading industrialists and a powerful official in the Nationalist government.
In 1948 she became honorary chairman of the Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee, a splinter group organized in Hong Kong to oppose Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang. After the establishment of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, Song remained on the mainland, where she was held in great deference by the communists because she symbolized a link between the People’s Republic and the older revolutionary movement of Sun Yat-sen. She became an important official within the new government, and in 1951 she was awarded the Stalin Peace Prize for her work on welfare and peace committees. In 1966, early in the Cultural Revolution, she was criticized by the Red Guards, but she retained her position. She was named honorary Chairman of the People’s Republic in 1981, shortly before her death.
