Sophonisba Preston Breckinridge,  (born April 1, 1866, Lexington, Kentucky, U.S.—died July 30, 1948, Chicago, Illinois), American welfare worker who led the social-work education movement in the United States.
Breckinridge graduated from Wellesley College in 1888. After a time as a schoolteacher in Washington, D.C., she studied law in her father’s office, and in 1895 she became the first woman to be admitted to the Kentucky bar.  Unable to practice law successfully because of gender discrimination, she soon moved to Chicago and enrolled in the University of Chicago’s graduate school. In 1901 she became the first woman to receive a Ph.D. in the field of political science, and three years later she was the first woman to graduate from the law school of the university. In 1904 she began teaching in the university’s department of household administration, a position she held until 1912.
In 1907 Breckinridge became interested in the Women’s Trade Union League and in the Hull House settlement, where she lived from 1907 to 1920. Also in 1907 she began working at the Chicago Institute of Social Science, which became the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy, a social-worker-training institution, the following year. Her efforts there led to the incorporation of that school by the University of Chicago to form the Graduate School of Social Service Administration in 1920. There she became a full professor by 1925, and her ideas about rigorous course work and training techniques set the standards for social-work education in the United States, bringing the school an international reputation.
Breckinridge also contributed to the growth of the idea that the state had to be involved in social-welfare programs, a view not widely accepted in the United States until the New Deal of the 1930s. She popularized the doctrine through her books and teaching and in the pages of the Social Service Review, a highly regarded journal of which she was cofounder in 1927 and which she edited until 1948.
Breckinridge helped to organize the Woman’s Peace Party and the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF). She is also known for her activities with the National American Woman Suffrage Association, the Illinois Consumer’s League, the U.S. Children’s Bureau, Chicago’s Immigrants’ Protective League, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Breckinridge was the author of more than a dozen books, including The Delinquent Child and the Home, with Edith Abbott (1912), Public Welfare Administration (1927), Women in the Twentieth Century (1933), and The Family and the State (1934). Breckinridge became professor emeritus in 1933, though she continued to teach a full schedule until 1942.
