Southern Baptist Convention,  largest Baptist group in the United States, organized at Augusta, Georgia, in 1845 by Southern Baptists who disagreed with the antislavery attitudes and activities of Northern Baptists. By the late 20th century, however, it had repudiated its history of support for racial segregation and had become one of the most ethnically diverse Protestant denominations in North America.
Like Baptists in the North, Baptists in the South trace their history back to the Baptist churches established in the American colonies in the 17th century. The number of Baptist churches increased and spread throughout the colonies in the 18th century, primarily because of the missionary work of the Philadelphia Baptist Association, which was organized in 1707 by five Baptist churches in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware. Early associations of Baptist churches in the South included the Charleston Association (1751) in South Carolina, the Ketochton Association (1765) in Virginia, and the Kehukee Association (1765) in North Carolina.
In the 19th century the Baptist churches and associations in the North and South cooperated on a national level in organizing foreign and home missions and religious publications. The slavery question, however, soon caused disagreements between Southern and Northern Baptists, and in 1845 the Southern Baptists set up their own organization. About 300 churches joined the new group. After abolition the convention maintained a socially conservative stance on race relations; for example, it opposed the civil rights movement of the mid-20th century. However, the convention adopted a resolution in 1995 denouncing racism and repudiating its past defense of slavery and opposition to the civil rights movement.
The Southern Baptist Convention has become a national rather than a regional organization, and it has long been by far the largest American Protestant body and one of the most rapidly growing. Its membership now includes a substantial fraction of ethnic minorities. In 2012 Fred Luter, Jr., became the denomination’s first African American president. Also that year the SBC agreed to allow some congregations whose members wished to avoid the negative associations of the denomination’s racist past to use the alternative name “Greater Baptist Convention.” (The denomination’s official title remained Southern Baptist Convention.)
From its beginnings the Southern Baptist Convention was a more centralized denominational organization than had been usual among the Baptists. It developed its own missions, publications, and educational and other boards that functioned under the direction of the convention. The centralized organization of the Southern Baptists has been credited with aiding the amazing growth of the convention following a period of recovery after the devastation of the American Civil War (1861–65).
Generally considered more conservative (both theologically and socially) than the American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A., the Southern Baptist Convention has not taken an active part in ecumenical activities. Though joining in the Baptist World Alliance, it has not joined the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A. or the World Council of Churches. There are state conventions, and a general convention is held annually. In the first decades of the 21st century the Southern Baptist Convention reported more than 16 million members and 45,000 congregations. Headquarters are in Nashville, Tennessee.
A related Canadian organization, the Canadian National Baptist Convention, reported more than 10,000 members and 250 congregations in the first decades of the 21st century. Its headquarters are in Cochrane, Alberta.
