Tata family,  family of Indian industrialists and philanthropists who founded ironworks and steelworks, cotton mills, and hydroelectric power plants that proved crucial to India’s industrial development.
The Tata were a Parsi priestly family who originally came from the former Baroda state (now Gujarat). The founder of the family’s fortunes was Jamsetji Nusserwanji Tata (born March 3, 1839, Navsari [India]—died May 19, 1904, Bad Nauheim, Germany). After an education at Elphinstone College in Bombay (Mumbai), he joined his father’s export trading firm in 1858 and helped establish branches of the company in Japan, China, Europe, and the United States. In 1872 he concentrated on cotton manufacturing, founding mills at Nagpur in 1877 and, later, at Bombay and Coorla. His enterprises were noted for efficiency, for improved labour-protection policies, and for the introduction of finer grades of fibre. He also introduced the production of raw silk to India and planned for the Bombay-area hydroelectric power plants that became the Tata Power companies after his death.
Tata began organizing India’s first large-scale ironworks in 1901, and these were incorporated in 1907 as Tata Iron and Steel Company. Under the direction of his sons, Sir Dorabji Jamsetji Tata (1859–1932) and Sir Ratanji Tata (1871–1932), the Tata Iron and Steel Company became the largest privately owned steelmaker in India and the nucleus of a group of companies producing not only textiles, steel, and hydroelectric power but also chemicals, agricultural equipment, trucks, locomotives, and cement. The family’s industrial facilities were concentrated in the city of Jamshedpur, in Bihar state.
In 1898 Tata donated land for a research institute that was later founded by his sons as the Indian Institute of Science, at Bangalore (Bengaluru). The Tata family went on to become perhaps the most important private funder of technical education and scientific research in India.
Upon the death of Sir Dorabji in 1932, Sir Naoroji Saklatvala, one of the founder’s nephews, became chairman of the Tata Group. On his death in 1938, Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhoy Tata (1904–93), whose father, R.D. Tata, had been a cousin and partner of the founder, became chairman. J.R.D. Tata founded Tata Airlines (1932), which was nationalized in 1953 and split up to form India’s chief domestic and international air carriers: Indian Airlines Corporation and Air-India, respectively. By the late 1950s the Tata Group  controlled the largest single aggregation of Indian industry. J.R.D. Tata was succeeded as chairman by his nephew, Ratan Tata, in 1991. Ratan aggressively sought to expand the Tata Group, acquiring such companies as the London-based Tetley Tea (2000) and the Anglo-Dutch steel manufacturer Corus Group (2007). In 2008 he oversaw Tata Motors’ purchase of the elite British car brands Jaguar and Land Rover from the Ford Motor Company. In 2012 Ratan retired as chairman and was succeeded by Cyrus Mistry. In October 2016 Mistry was abruptly dismissed, and Ratan took over as interim chairman; media reports indicated that conflicts over business strategy were the reason for Mistry’s ouster. In January 2017 Natarajan Chandrasekaran was appointed as the new chairman of the Tata Group.
