The arts, also called fine arts,  modes of expression that use skill or imagination in the creation of aesthetic objects, environments, or experiences that can be shared with others.
Traditional categories within the arts include literature (including poetry, drama, story, and so on), the visual arts (painting, drawing, sculpture, etc.), the graphic arts (painting, drawing, design, and other forms expressed on flat surfaces), the plastic arts (sculpture, modeling), the decorative arts (enamelwork, furniture design, mosaic, etc.), the performing arts (theatre, dance, music), music (as composition), and architecture (often including interior design).
The arts are treated in a number of articles. For general discussions of the foundations, principles, practice, and character of the arts, see aesthetics. For the technical and theoretical aspects of several arts, see architecture, calligraphy, dance, drawing, literature, motion picture, music, painting, photography, printmaking, sculpture, and theatre. See also the historical discussions in history of the motion picture and history of photography.
Technical and historical discussions of decorative arts and furnishings can be found in basketry, enamelwork, floral decoration, furniture, glassware, interior design, lacquerwork, metalwork, mosaic, pottery, rug and carpet, stained glass, and tapestry.
For treatments of the various arts as practiced by specific peoples and cultures, see African architecture; African art; African dance; African literature; African music; Central Asian arts; East Asian arts; Islamic arts; Latin American architecture; Latin American art; Latin American dance; Latin American literature; Latin American music; Native American art; Native American dance; Native American literature; Native American music; Oceanic arts; Oceanic literature; South Asian arts; Southeast Asian arts; Western architecture; Western dance; Western music; Western painting; and Western sculpture. Literatures are often treated by the language in which they are written. See, for example, Slovene literature; Mongolian literature.
