The Honourable,  a style or title of honour common to the United Kingdom, the countries of the Commonwealth, and the United States. It is taken from the French honorable and ultimately derived from the Latin honorabilis (“worthy of honour”).
Edward Gibbon equates the late Roman title of clarissimus with “honourable” as applied to the lowest of the three grades of rank in the imperial hierarchy. The analogy held only in so far as both styles were applicable to those who belonged to the less exalted ranks of the titled classes, for the title “honourable” was not definitely confined to certain classes until later. The terms honorabilis and honorabilitas were in use in the Middle Ages as a form of politeness rather than as a specific title. As a formal address, it is found frequently in the Paston Letters (15th century), but it is used loosely and interchangeably with other styles. John, Viscount Beaumont, is addressed alternately as “my worshipful and reverent Lord” and as “my right honorabull Lord,” while John Paston, a plain esquire, is “my right honurabyll maister.” More than two centuries later John Selden, in his Titles of Honor (1614), does not include “honourable” among the courtesy titles given to the children of peers.
The style was, in fact, used extremely loosely until well on into the 18th century. The registers of Westminster Abbey record the burial in 1710 of “The Hon. George Churchill, Esq.,” who was a Royal Navy admiral and a son of Sir Winston Churchill, and of “The Hon. Sir William Godolphin,” who was a baronet. In 1717 was buried “The Hon. Colonel Henry Cornwall,” who was an esquire as well as the son of one, while in 1743 a rear admiral was buried as “The Hon. Sir John Jennings, Knight.” “The Hon. Major-General Lowther,” whose father was a Dublin merchant, was buried in 1746, and the following year saw the interment of “The Hon. Lieutenant-General Guest,” who is said to have begun life as a stable hand. From this time onwards the style of “honourable” tended to become more narrowly applied, but the matter is full of obscurity and contradictions.
British baronets, for instance, claimed that they had been styled “the honourable” until the end of the 18th century, and in 1835 they petitioned for the style as a prefix to their names. The Heralds’ College officially reported on the petition on October 31, 1835, stating that the presented evidence did not prove the right of baronets to the style and that its use “has been no more warranted by authority than when the same style has been applied to Field Officers in the Army and others.” They added that “the style of ‘The Honourable’ is given to the Judges and to the Barons of the Exchequer, with others; because, by the Decree of the 10th of King James the First, for settling the place and precedency of the Baronets, the Judges, and Barons of the Exchequer,…were declared to have place and precedence before the younger sons of Viscounts and Barons.” This seems to make the style a consequence of precedence, yet from the examples above given it is clear that it was applied—such as in the case of field officers—where no question of precedence arose.
It is not, indeed, until 1874 that there is any clear evidence of an authoritative limitation of the title. In this year the wives of Lords of Appeal were granted style and precedence as baronesses, but it was provided that their children were not “to assume or use the prefix of Honourable, or to be entitled to the style, rank or precedence of the children of a Baron.” In 1898, however, this was revoked, and it was ordained “that such children shall have and enjoy on all occasions the style and title enjoyed by the children of hereditary Barons together with the rank and precedence.” By these acts of the Crown, the prefix “honourable” would seem to have been restricted as a definite title of honour, yet in legal documents the sons of peers are still styled merely “esquire." This latter fact points to the time when the prefix “honourable” was a mark of deference paid by others rather than a style assumed by right. Relics of this survived into the 20th century in the United Kingdom in the conventions by which an “honourable” did not use the title on a visiting card and was not announced as such.
As to the actual use and social significance of the style, the practice in the United Kingdom differs considerably from that in the Commonwealth or in the United States. In the United Kingdom marquesses are “most honourable”; earls, viscounts, and barons are “right honourable,” a style also borne by all privy councillors, including the lord mayor of London and the lord provost of Edinburgh during office. The title of “honourable” in the United Kingdom is mainly confined to the sons and daughters of peers, except by special licence of the Crown, and is the common style of the younger sons of earls and of the children of viscounts, barons, and legal life peers. The eldest sons of dukes, marquesses, and earls bear “by courtesy” their father’s second title, the younger sons of dukes and marquesses having the courtesy title “Lord” prefixed to their given name. The daughters of dukes, marquesses, and earls are styled “Lady.” The title of “honourable” is also given to all present or past maids of honour and to the judges of the High Court. A circuit court judge is, however, “his honour" or “her honour.” The epithet is also applied to the House of Commons as a body and to individual members during debate (“the honourable member for X”). Other corporate bodies have, by tradition or grant, the right to bear the style, including The Honourable The Irish Society, the Inns of Court (The Honourable Society of the Inner Temple), and the Honourable Artillery Company. The East India Company also had the prefix “Honourable.” The style may not be assumed by corporate bodies at will, as was proved in the case of the Society of Baronets, whose original style of “Honourable Society” was dropped by command.
In the countries of the Commonwealth, the title “honourable” is given to members of the executive and legislative bodies during their term of service. It is sometimes retained by royal licence after a certain number of years’ service. Governors-general are accorded the title “Right Honourable” in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand and “Most Honourable” in Jamaica.
In the United States the title is very widespread, being commonly given to anyone who holds or has held any office of importance in state or nation. More particularly it is granted to members of Congress or state legislatures, judges, justices, and certain other judicial and executive officials. Popular amenity even sometimes extends the title to holders of quite humble government appointments and consoles with it the defeated candidates for a post.
