Theodor Julius Geiger,  (born Nov. 9, 1891, Munich, Ger.—died  June 16, 1952, at sea), German sociologist and first professor of sociology in Denmark, whose most important studies concerned social stratification and social mobility.
Geiger served in World War I, after which he returned to Munich to take his doctorate in law. He was a teacher, journalist, and government statistician in Berlin and then was a professor of sociology (1928–33) at the Brunswick Institute of Technology. After the rise to power of the Nazis, of whom he was an early critic, he fled to Copenhagen. There a Rockefeller Foundation fellowship and an appointment to the Institute of History and Economics sustained him until 1938, when he was given a full professorship at the University of Århus, in Denmark. During the German occupation of Denmark in World War II, Geiger was exiled again and went to Sweden, teaching at the universities of Stockholm and Uppsala. After the war Geiger returned to Århus (1945), where he founded and directed the first Scandinavian institute of sociological research and developed the academic journal Acta Sociologica.
Influenced by Marxism, he believed for a time in the existence (specifically in Germany) of a well-defined class structure; but by 1948, when his Klassesamfundet i Støbergryden (“Class Society in the Melting Pot”) was published, he had abandoned that idea. His basic textbook was Sociologi (1939).
His work on social stratification and mobility included studies of Danish intellectuals and a detailed examination of the people of Århus, Soziale Umschichtungen in einer dänischen Mittelstadt (1951; “Social Changes in a Medium-Sized Danish City”). Long interested in the sociology of public order, he wrote Vorstudien zu einer Soziologie des Rechts (1947; reprinted 1964; “Preliminary Studies on the Sociology of Law”), which dealt with law and regulation in society. Several of his works were published posthumously: Ideologie und Wahrheit (1953; “Ideology and Truth”) discusses ideology and its role in the creation of mass society; and Demokratic ohne Dogma (1964; “Democracy Without Dogma”) is notable for Geiger’s vision of a society depersonalized by ideology but redeemed by human relationships. Geiger died at sea when he was returning from a year as visiting professor in Toronto.
