Tibeto-Burman languages,  language group within the Sino-Tibetan family. In the early 21st century, Tibeto-Burman languages were spoken by approximately 57 million people; countries that had more than 1 million Tibeto-Burman speakers included Myanmar (Burma; about 29 million), China (some 17.2 million), India (about 5.5 million), Nepal (some 2.5 million), and Bhutan (about 1.2 million). Other countries with substantial numbers of Tibeto-Burman speakers included Thailand (535,000), Bangladesh (530,000), Pakistan (360,000), Laos (42,000), and Vietnam (40,000).
The great Sino-Tibetan (ST) language family, comprising Chinese on the one hand and Tibeto-Burman (TB) on the other, is comparable in time-depth and internal diversity to the Indo-European language family and is equally important in the context of world civilization. The cultural and numerical predominance of Chinese (nearly 2 billion speakers) is counterbalanced by the sheer number of languages (some 250–300) in the Tibeto-Burman branch. Many scholars, especially in China, interpret “Sino-Tibetan” to include the Tai and Hmong-Mien families as well, although a consensus is developing that these two families, while possibly related to each other, have only an ancient contact relationship with Chinese.
After the existence of the Tibeto-Burman family was posited in the mid-19th century, British scholars, missionaries, and colonial administrators in India and Burma (now Myanmar) began to study some of the dozens of little-known “tribal” languages of the region that seemed to be genetically related to the two major literary languages, Tibetan and Burmese. This early work was collected by Sir George Grierson in the Linguistic Survey of India (1903–28), three sections of which (vol. 3, parts 1, 2, and 3) are devoted to word lists and brief texts from TB languages.
Further progress in TB studies had to wait until the late 1930s, when Robert Shafer headed a project called Sino-Tibetan Linguistics at the University of California, Berkeley. This project assembled all the lexical material then available on TB languages, enabling Shafer to venture a detailed subgrouping of the family at different taxonomic levels, called (from higher to lower) divisions, sections, branches, units, languages, and dialects. This work was finally published in a two-volume, five-part opus called Introduction to Sino-Tibetan (vol. 1, 1966–67; vol. 2, 1974).
Basing his own work on the same body of material, Paul K. Benedict produced an unpublished manuscript titled “Sino-Tibetan: A Conspectus” (henceforth referred to as the Conspectus) in the early 1940s. In that work he adopted a more modest approach to supergrouping and subgrouping, stressing that many TB languages had so far resisted precise classification. Benedict’s structural insight enabled him to formulate sound correspondences (regular phonological similarities between languages) with greater precision and thereby to identify exceptional phonological developments.
A revised and heavily annotated version of the Conspectus was published in 1972, ushering in the modern era of Sino-Tibetan historical/comparative linguistics. In this recension nearly 700 roots of the ancestral language, Proto-Tibeto-Burman (PTB), were reconstructed, as well as some 325 comparisons of PTB roots with Old Chinese etyma, largely as reconstructed by Bernhard Karlgren in his Grammata Serica Recensa (1957). Although Benedict focused principally on five key phonologically conservative TB languages (Tibetan, Burmese, Lushai [Mizo], Kachin [Jingpo], and Garo), he also used data from more than 100 others.
Except for the “major literary” languages (Tibetan and Burmese) and the somewhat more numerous “minor literary” ones (Xixia [Tangut], Newar, Meitei [Manipuri], Naxi-Moso, Yi [Lolo], Bai [Minchia], and Pyu), no TB languages left written texts that predate the early 20th century. This has caused some difficulties in the reconstruction of PTB, although scholarly consensus has been reached on many of its features.
The Proto-Sino-Tibetan (PST) homeland seems to have been somewhere on the Plateau of Tibet, where the great rivers of East and Southeast Asia (including the Huang He [Yellow River], Yangtze [Chang Jiang], Mekong, Brahmaputra, and Salween) have their source. The time of hypothetical Sino-Tibetan unity, when the Proto-Han (Proto-Chinese) and PTB peoples formed a relatively undifferentiated linguistic community, must have been at least as remote as the Proto-Indo-European period, perhaps about 4000 bce.
The Tibeto-Burman peoples slowly fanned outward along these river valleys, but only in the middle of the 1st millennium of the Common Era did they penetrate into peninsular Southeast Asia, where speakers of Austronesian and Mon-Khmer languages had already established themselves. The Tai peoples began filtering down from the north at about the same time as the Tibeto-Burmans. The most recent arrivals to the area south of China were speakers of Hmong-Mien (Miao-Yao) languages, most of whom still live in China itself.
In part because the Tibeto-Burman family extends over such an enormous geographic range, it is characterized by great typological diversity. Some of its subgroups, such as Loloish, are highly tonal, monosyllabic, and analytic, with a minimum of affixational morphology (grammatical prefixes or suffixes). At the other extreme are marginally tonal or atonal languages with complex systems of verbal agreement morphology, such as those in the Kiranti group of eastern Nepal. While most Tibeto-Burman languages are verb-final, the Karenic and Baic branches have SVO (subject–verb–object) word order, like Chinese.
Influences from Chinese on the one hand and Indo-Aryan languages on the other have contributed significantly to the diversity of the TB family. It is convenient to refer to the Chinese and Indian spheres of cultural influence as the Sinosphere and the Indosphere. Some languages and cultures are firmly in one or the other: the TB languages of Nepal and much of the Kamarupan branch of TB are Indospheric, as are the Munda and Khasi branches of Austroasiatic. The Loloish branch of TB, the Hmong-Mien family, the Kam-Sui branch of Kadai, and the Viet-Muong branch of Mon-Khmer are Sinospheric. Others (such as Tibetan and Thai), have been influenced by both Chinese and Indian cultures. Still other linguistic communities are so geographically remote that they have escaped significant influence from either cultural tradition, as with the Aslian branch of Mon-Khmer in Malaya and the Nicobarese branch in the Nicobar Islands of the Indian Ocean.
Elements of Indian culture, especially ideas of social hierarchy (varna), religions (Hinduism and Buddhism), and Devanagari writing systems, began to penetrate both insular and peninsular Southeast Asia about 2000 years ago. Indic writing systems were adopted first by speakers of Austronesian (Javanese and Cham) and Austroasiatic languages (Khmer and Mon) and then by speakers of Tai (Thai and Lao) and TB languages (Pyu, Burmese, and Karen). The learned components of the vocabularies of Khmer, Mon, Burmese, Thai, and Lao consist of words of Pali and Sanskrit origin. Indian influence also spread north to the Himalayan region. Tibetan has used Devanagari writing since 600 ce but has preferred to create new religious and technical vocabulary from native morphemes rather than Indic ones.
What is now China south of the Yangtze did not have a considerable Han Chinese population until the beginning of the Common Era. In early times the scattered Chinese communities of the region must have been on a numerical and cultural par with the coterritorial non-Chinese populations, and the borrowing of material culture and vocabulary must have proceeded in all directions. As late as the end of the 1st millennium ce, non-Chinese states that flourished on the periphery of the Middle Kingdom included Nanzhao and Bai in Yunnan, Xi Xia in the Gansu-Qinghai-Tibet border regions, and Yi (Lolo) chieftaincies in Sichuan. The Mongol Yuan dynasty finally consolidated Chinese power south of the Yangtze in the 13th century. Tibet also fell under Mongol influence then but did not come under Chinese suzerainty until the 18th century.
Whatever their genetic affiliations, the languages of the Sino-Tibetan area have undergone massive convergence in all areas of their structure—phonological, grammatical, and semantic. Hundreds of words have crossed over genetic boundaries in the course of millennia of intense language contact, and it is often exceedingly difficult to distinguish ancient loans from genuine cognates.
Although the total number of TB speakers is only about 57 million, smaller than for Tai-Kadai or Mon-Khmer/Austroasiatic, the number of individual TB languages is the largest of any family in East and Southeast Asia. The most populous language, Burmese, has only about 22 million native speakers, while the number of Thai and Vietnamese speakers increased rapidly (to more than 45 and 55 million speakers respectively) in the closing decades of the 20th century.
A variety of reasons make it impossible to determine the exact number of TB languages. Contributory factors include the elusiveness of the distinction between languages and dialects and the fact that a number of languages remain to be discovered or described. Even more problematic is the profusion of different names for the same language and the confusion of names denoting languages with those denoting ethnic groups—of the more than 1,400 Tibeto-Burman language names, many are only multiple designations for the same language or dialect. Any given language is likely to be known by several names, including its autonym (what its speakers call it), one or more exonyms (what other groups call it), paleonyms (old names, some of which are now thought to be pejorative), and neonyms (new names) that have often replaced the old. To take a relatively simple case, the Lotha Naga of India are a scheduled (officially recognized) tribe of fewer than 100,000 people, yet the people and their language are called by at least three exonyms—Chizima, Choimi, and Miklai, by the neighbouring Angami, Sema, and Assamese peoples, respectively. The paleonyms Lolo, Lushai, Abor, Dafla, and Mikir have for the most part been replaced by Yi, Mizo, Adi, Nyishi, and Karbi, respectively.
A more complex situation can obtain when politics enters into ethnic and linguistic nomenclature. For instance, although the country formerly known as Burma officially adopted the ethnonym Myanmar in 1989, linguistic scholars have generally retained the use of Burmese (not Myanmarese) as the name of its dominant language and Tibeto-Burman (not Tibeto-Myanmarese) as the name of the language family to which Burmese belongs. In addition, many language names are used in both a narrower and a broader sense, sometimes referring to one specific language and at other times to a whole group of linguistically or culturally related languages. Finally, small or vulnerable groups often use the name of a larger or more prestigious neighbour.
Scholars estimate that the Tibeto-Burman family contains approximately 250–300 languages. There are 8 Tibeto-Burman languages with over 1,000,000 speakers (Burmese, Tibetan, Bai, Yi [Lolo], Karen, Meitei, Hani, Jingpo) and altogether about 50 with more than 100,000 speakers. At the other end of the scale are some 125 languages with fewer than 10,000 speakers; many of these languages are now endangered. Sometimes population figures can be linguistically misleading. The Tujia (autonym Pitsikha) people of Hunan and Hubei are officially numbered at some 3,000,000, but their language has been inundated by Chinese, so only a few thousand fluent speakers of Tujia remain.
Political and geographic factors once rendered much of the Tibeto-Burman language area chronically inaccessible to fieldwork by scholars from outside, but a veritable explosion of new data began to become available in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, especially from China and Nepal.
