Tina Brown, one of the most prominent magazine editors of her time, wrote The Diana Chronicles in 2007. Brown knew Diana, princess of Wales, and in fact she met with her a final time mere weeks before Diana’s death in a car accident in Paris on August 31, 1997. In 2007, on the 10-year anniversary of Diana’s death, Britannica contributor Victoria Lautman interviewed Brown about Diana’s legacy.
Victoria Lautman: You recently asked Prime Minister Tony Blair about Diana’s legacy and significance and whether she taught the monarchy a new way to be royal. His reply was swift: “No. Diana taught us a new way to be British.” How so?
Tina Brown: Blair meant that Diana gave the stiff upper lip, uptight, emotion-denying old Establishment face of England a way to be modern, caring, and less locked in outworn class judgments. She was the most well-born girl imaginable, and very good at putting a brave face on things when she was sad, but she also made people who had problems they had always felt were shameful feel better about themselves. She did that by sharing her own. When she talked in public about her bulimia, she let a generation of young girls out of the closet on that issue. Her keen awareness of people less lucky than herself was matched by the spirit and message of Blair’s New Labour party that won the election shortly before Diana died. Both PM and Princess were in sync with Britain’s desire to put the hard-faced Thatcher years behind them.
Victoria Lautman: When you lunched with Diana just weeks before her death, you say what struck you most was how much celebrityhood had seemingly transformed her appearance. In one of the most commented on sections of your book, you even suggest that “the heads of world-class celebrities literally seem to enlarge.” What exactly do you mean by this?
Tina Brown: I mean that very famous people do seem to expand under the glare of media spotlight and public attention. Perhaps it is because as they accrue money, poise, grooming and an acute sense of who they are, everything about them gets exaggerated. Hair gets blonder, faces enhanced with plastic surgery, trademark characteristics are emphasized until they almost become cartoons. In Diana’s case she was enormously tall. And as she cared less about having to please the shorter Prince of Wales and worked out obsessively in the gym, where once she shyly slouched, after fifteen years in the spotlight she stood more upright and was unafraid to wear high heels.
Victoria Lautman: You’ve stated that Diana accelerated the media’s frenzied obsession with celebrity, that “Diana sold papers like no one has ever sold papers,” and that the problem today is “that there are so many outlets that there aren’t enough real celebrities to go round.” You also castigate the press and the paparazzi in particular, because, by the time of Diana’s death, “subjects and photographers alike had been degraded by the media’s inexhaustible appetite for celebrity images.” Gaby Wood in Slate magazine said such comments are a bit like the pot calling the kettle black, that, in this regard, you write as both “expert and perpetrator.” How do you respond to such criticism, and is there a difference between the kind of attention accorded Diana and the kind doted on celebrities like Paris Hilton? Is power, and not simply money and moniker, a key element here?
Tina Brown: I am indeed both expert and perpetrator, the study of celebrity having absorbed a great deal of my professional life. My point is that with the multiplication of outlets there is an A-list celebrity famine. In order to fill the covers of magazines the bar has been lowered to create stars out of total nonentities. Real stars are so rare and probably always have been. Media today is as voracious as it is infinite but there are probably only ever six major marquee names that people truly care about at any one time. So the manufacture of wannabes and nobodies has become a subindustry of Hollywood that threatens to drown the real commodity. I think Diana and perhaps JFK Jr.…on the male side were the last two golden icons that exuded true glamour, that sense of untouchability however accessible they seemed to be. Paris Hilton is just a stand-in. Money gave her a bit of an edge, sure, but let’s not kid ourselves. It’s the porn video that made her. Money and sex were the potent combination that kicked her up into the stratosphere.
Victoria Lautman: You’ve said that, because of the trajectory of your own fame, you’ve developed a better understanding of what it’s like to be inaccurately portrayed and have every move tracked, and consequently you can pursue stories with more clarity, fairness, and insight. Does this mean you’re more sympathetic to celebrities now, and would this understanding have changed your approach to stories, say, 10 or 20 years ago?
Tina Brown: It’s not so much a question of being more sympathetic as being less reductive. When you are written about yourself you become keenly aware—and bored to death by—the way journalists so often try to cram a story into the same boring old narrative rather than allow that people can be complicated, have motives that are mixed, or pressures that haven’t been understood. For instance, Katie Couric when she was in her last years at the Today show—the narrative was she was a b-tch, temperamental, beastly to staff and her numbers were off because audiences were tired of her. That narrative totally ignored the fact that she was being temperamental because Today had foisted on her a producer who wasn’t cutting it. She was being made to take the heat for the fact that the show was much less good than in the past and she couldn’t get herself heard at the management level. Eventually she got her way and that producer was fired. And what happened—the show immediately improved and the ratings went up again. But no one wrote that that was the scenario. The deliciousness of pumping out the same old narrative—that old female diva story—was too irresistible for anyone to write the truth.
Victoria Lautman: I’ve been thinking about all the celebrities who have leveraged their fame for global good: Bono, Angelina, DiCaprio, Madonna…the list goes on. But you credit Diana with paving this path for “celebrity humanitarians” when she first began visiting AIDS patients, hand-held lepers, and traipsed through fields of land mines. In your opinion, how much of her effort was utterly sincere and how much was the type of calculated media manipulation of which she was so fond? And is there anybody you see now or on the horizon who can hold a candle to the kind of celebrity Diana became, and who might eventually fill her void?
Tina Brown: One aspect of Diana where I never found her fake was in her humanitarian work. Sometimes it is true, she would exploit her visits for a photo-op that would make her look good during her wars with Charles. But once she was present in the company of the sick, the disabled, the elderly or whomever she was genuinely, authentically involved and empathetic. She had been that way ever since she was a very young girl and had a real gift for making the mental patients she visited happy on class social service trips. I also discovered that she did many, many acts of kindness out of the public eye—keeping in touch with the relatives of the terminally ill she had consoled in hospices, phoning sick kids she had met on her visits. I can’t think of anyone right now who has as much of a powerful natural empathy as Diana. She really lit up and warmed the lives of the patients and the underprivileged she visited. The current celebrity humanitarians are doing a great job at spotlighting the ills of the world, but they don’t seem to have anything like Diana’s special connection to the people they help.
Victoria Lautman: Writer Catherine Whitney, author of The Women of Windsor (2007), [said the following in an article for Britannica’s blog in 2007]:
Tina Brown: Yes, but it will not be for long. Queen Elizabeth II is still going strong and Camilla is already long in the tooth. Diana will have the last laugh when her gorgeous son becomes King William.
Victoria Lautman: [Britannica reaches] readers around the world. Given this wide exposure, could you say a few words about how perceptions of Diana differ in different regions, from Africa to Asia, and if, for instance, the British were more critical of her and Americans more fawning, what accounts for this? Could the size of a country, and the structure of its mass media, affect how a celebrity like Diana is portrayed?
Tina Brown: The global Princess Diana is better understood than the princess in the palace at home. Britain has a uniquely vicious, gossipy and plural press. Few high-profile lives can retain their dignity when trashed the way the British tabloids go at it. After a time, it’s almost impossible to see the contours of a person’s achievements so mired are they in sensational stories and made-up intrigue and lurid exposes. What people in Africa and Asia and America saw in Diana was a unique combination of glamour, empathy, and good intentions. After all, why was a princess bothering to visit an AIDS ward in Harlem, or a wretched rundown hospital in Angola, or leprosy clinic in Indonesia unless she cared, unless she wanted to send a message of compassion, unless she felt her presence would shine a light in dark places? It may still take more than ten years for the British people to see her with such clarity, but I hope my book has gone some way to making that happen.
