Tom Steyer, byname of Thomas Fahr Steyer,  (born June 27, 1957, New York City, New York, U.S.), American business executive and philanthropist who founded (1986) Farallon Capital Management and later became a noted environmental activist.
Steyer, who was born into a wealthy family, attended Phillips Exeter Academy and then Yale University, where he studied economics and political science and served as captain of the soccer team. After graduating in 1979, he worked for Morgan Stanley before earning an M.B.A. (1983) from Stanford University.  Steyer later joined Goldman Sachs, where he became known for his aggressive investments. He left the company in 1986 to create Farallon Capital Management; the hedge fund was named for a group of islands near San Francisco that were known for their shark-infested waters.
Under Steyer’s guidance, Farallon became one of the leading hedge funds, especially known for its management of university endowments. The hedge fund’s incredible success, however, was not without controversy. In 2004 students at Yale and other universities protested their schools’ involvement with Farallon, which they alleged was involved in ventures that, at times, were not socially or environmentally responsible. According to some reports, the backlash led Steyer to become increasingly involved in climate-change efforts. Already a supporter of the Democratic Party, he also became more active in political causes. In 2008 he helped quash an effort to end California’s winner-take-all electoral allotment, and two years later he played a key role in the defeat of Proposition 23, which sought to suspend a state law that called for substantial reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, he provided financial support to various politicians. Such efforts made Steyer a highly influential figure in California politics.
In 2012 Steyer left Farallon and began to divest his portfolio of businesses that were not consistent with his activism, especially those involved with fossil fuels. The following year he became the founding president of NextGen Climate, which was largely involved in environmental issues. He also created NextGen Climate Action Committee, a PAC that helped establish him on the national political scene. Steyer’s other initiatives included the nonprofit Beneficial State Bank in Oakland, California, which he founded with his wife, Kat, in 2007.
Steyer gained a more national profile in 2017, when he launched a campaign to impeach U.S. Pres. Donald Trump. His efforts included digital and television advertisements as well as an online petition. Although there was speculation that he would seek the U.S. presidency, in January 2019 Steyer announced that he would not run. However, six months later he entered the race, vowing to spend at least $100 million on his campaign. After disappointing performances in several primaries and caucuses, he withdrew from the race in February 2020. Steyer later endorsed Joe Biden as the Democratic nominee, and Biden ultimately defeated Trump.
