Tomáš Halik,  (born June 1, 1948, Prague, Czechoslovakia [now Czech Republic]), Czech Roman Catholic priest and sociologist who advocated for religious tolerance and interfaith dialogue. He was awarded the Templeton Prize in 2014.
Influenced by such British Roman Catholic authors as G.K. Chesterton and Graham Greene, Halik converted to Roman Catholicism at 18 years of age. He studied sociology and philosophy at Charles University, Prague, and earned a Ph.D. in 1972. Halik also studied and received a license in psychotherapy. At his doctoral graduation ceremony, he gave a speech on truth that the Czechoslovak communist regime deemed sufficiently subversive to condemn him as an “enemy of the regime” and thereby bar him from receiving any academic position. In 1978 in a clandestine ceremony, Halik was ordained a priest.
During the 1980s Halik was an active dissident. He offered religious services and helped organize an underground network dedicated to religious and cultural freedom. He remained a central figure in Czech intellectual life following the 1989 Velvet Revolution, which resulted in the fall of the communist regime, and he became an adviser to Pres. Václav Havel. In 1992 Pope John Paul II appointed him adviser to the Pontifical Council for Dialogue with Non-Believers. The following year Halik joined the sociology faculty at his alma mater, and he attained the rank of professor in 1997. He also served there as the head of the religious-studies department. In Prague he was rector of the Church of the Holy Saviour and was the cofounder and longtime president of the Czech Christian Academy. In 2009 Pope Benedict XVI bestowed upon Halik the title of monsignor—honorary prelate of His Holiness.
In works such as Oslovit Zachea (2003; Patience with God), Halik questioned the opposition between faith and doubt and stressed the commonality that often exists between “seekers,” whether they identify themselves as religious persons or not. Halik’s critique of dogmatism and his effort to reach out to non-Roman Catholics and even to nonbelievers led many to draw parallels between his vision for the church and that of Pope Francis I.
