Trade association, also called trade organization,  voluntary association of business firms organized on a geographic or industrial basis to promote and develop commercial and industrial opportunities within its sphere of operation, to voice publicly the views of members on matters of common interest, or in some cases to exercise some measure of control over prices, output, and channels of distribution.
The oldest and most widespread trade organizations are chambers of commerce, also known as commercial associations, boards of trade, and development associations. Although in most countries their focus is the development of business opportunity and community improvement, in France the chambers of commerce have served as agencies of official administrative control of public commercial institutions. In 1599 the city of Marseille established the first chambre de commerce and empowered it to send consuls, embassies, and commercial missions to certain countries. Modern French chambres have owned and administered sections of stock exchanges, bonded warehouses, public salesrooms, and port, dock, inland waterway, and airfield facilities.
The first British chamber of commerce—a voluntary association of independent firms in industry, commerce, and trade—was organized in 1768 in Jersey, Channel Islands, to protect and promote common local interests. Many new chambers were formed both in Britain and abroad as economic development went forward—e.g., in New York state in 1768, in Calcutta (Kolkata) in 1834, and in Paris in 1873. Today many countries have chambers of commerce abroad, in important cities throughout the world.
The one organization truly international in scope is the International Chamber of Commerce, a world federation of business organizations, business firms, and businessmen founded in 1920.
Trade associations organized according to industries or products have a significant impact on prices, sales, output, and technology, although they rarely extend their activities beyond national boundaries. In their modern form these associations began in the late 19th century in many countries, including the United States, Britain, and Japan, but they existed as early as 1821 in France. Most trade associations confine themselves to voicing their members’ views on matters of common interest; particularly in the United States, this exercise has included legislative lobbying. In some countries they may also have some control over prices and production levels, but in those countries with strong antitrust legislation (e.g., the United States) this type of organization has been short-lived. (See marketing board.)
Separate employers’ organizations have been founded in some countries, including Britain, Australia, and India, to deal with labour questions. French industrial federations, on the other hand, represent the interests of the members both as manufacturers and as employers.
