National Dialogue Quartet,  coalition of Tunisian civil society organizations—the Tunisian General Labour Union (Union Générale Tunisienne du Travail; UGTT), the Tunisian Order of Lawyers (Ordre National des Avocats de Tunisie), the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and Handicrafts (Union Tunisienne de l’Industrie, du Commerce et de l’Artisinat; UTICA), and the Tunisian Human Rights League (La Ligue Tunisienne pour la Défense des Droits de l’Homme; LTDH)—that was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2015 for its efforts to broker peaceful political compromise in Tunisia in the wake of the Tunisian Revolution of 2010–11 (also called the Jasmine Revolution).
In 2013 Tunisia’s transition to democracy appeared to be in crisis. The interim coalition government, led by the Islamist Ennahda Party, faced accusations from the secular opposition that it was ineffectual and power-hungry and that it was doing too little to rein in Islamist radicals. The opposition’s fears were seemingly confirmed by the assassination of Chokri Belaid, a secularist politician, in February. In June the government unveiled a draft constitution that was immediately denounced by the opposition members of the National Constituent Assembly—the 217-member body charged with drafting a new constitution—who complained that compromises negotiated in the assembly had been left out of the final draft. The crisis escalated further in July when 65 members of the National Constituent Assembly temporarily withdrew from the assembly in protest after a second opposition politician, Mohamed Brahmi, was assassinated.
On July 30 the UGTT called for a national dialogue to resolve the crisis, and it was soon joined by three other civil society groups—the Tunisian Order of Lawyers, the UTICA, and the LTDH—forming the National Dialogue Quartet. An initiative for roundtable talks organized by the Quartet began in August and was eventually joined by 21 political parties. Those talks yielded a road map calling for the formation of a technocratic caretaker government to replace the one led by Ennahda. In December the first part of the Quartet-brokered compromise came into effect when its participants selected Mehdi Jomaa as the head of the new government. Encouraged by the implementation of the road map, members of the opposition returned to the National Constituent Assembly in late 2013.
By brokering a productive dialogue between the main actors in Tunisian politics, the Quartet helped set the country back on the path toward normality after the uprising in 2011. A new constitution was ratified on January 26, 2014, and the first regular parliamentary and presidential elections were held in October and December of the same year. For its role in brokering a peaceful settlement to the political crisis of 2013, the Quartet was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in October 2015.
