Varna, Sanskrit varṇa,  any one of the four traditional social classes of India. Although the literal meaning of the word varna (Sanskrit: “colour”) once invited speculation that class distinctions were originally based on differences in degree of skin pigmentation between an alleged group of lighter-skinned invaders called “Aryans” and the darker indigenous people of ancient India, this theory has been discredited since the mid-20th century. The notion of “colour” was most likely a device of classification. Colours were frequently used as classifiers; e.g., the Vedic scripture known as the Yajurveda is divided into two groups of texts, White and Black.
The varnas have been known since a hymn in the Rigveda (the oldest surviving Indian text) that portrays the Brahman (priest), the Kshatriya (noble), the Vaishya (commoner), and the Shudra (servant) issued forth at creation from the mouth, arms, thighs, and feet of the primeval person (purusha). Males of the first three varnas are “twice-born” (dvija): after undergoing the ceremony of spiritual rebirth (upanayana), they are initiated into manhood and are free to study the Vedas, the ancient scriptures of Hinduism. The Shudra live in service to the other three. The Vaishya, in turn, as common people, grazers, and cultivators, contrast with the governing classes—i.e., the secular Kshatriya, or barons, and the sacerdotal Brahmans. Brahmans and Kshatriya themselves contrast in that the former are the priests, while the latter have the actual dominion. In the older description, far greater emphasis is placed on the functions of the classes than on hereditary membership, in contradistinction to caste, which emphasizes heredity over function.
The system of the four classes (caturvarnya) is fundamental to the views the traditional lawgivers held of society. They specified a different set of obligations for each: the task of the Brahman is to study and advise, the baron to protect, the Vaishya to cultivate, and the serf to serve. History shows, however, that the four-class system was more a social model than a reality. The multitudinousness of castes (or jati) is explained as the result of hypergamous and hypogamous alliances between the four classes and their descendants. The inclusion of the Shudra into the four-varna system bestowed on them a measure of dignity. A move to accommodate still others not so distinguished led to the rather unofficial acceptance of a fifth class, the pancama (Sanskrit: “fifth”), which include the “untouchable” classes and others, such as tribal groups, who are outside the system and, consequently, avarna (“classless”).
In modern times, traditional Hindus, awakened to the inequities of the caste system yet believing the four-varna system to be fundamental to the good society, have often advocated a return to this clear-cut varna system by reforming castes. Individual castes, in turn, have sought to raise their social rank by identifying with a particular varna and demanding its privileges of rank and honour.
