Victimology,  branch of criminology that scientifically studies the relationship between an injured party and an offender by examining the causes and the nature of the consequent suffering. Specifically, victimology focuses on whether the perpetrators were complete strangers, mere acquaintances, friends, family members, or even intimates and why a particular person or place was targeted. Criminal victimization may inflict economic costs, physical injuries, and psychological harm.
Victimology first emerged in the 1940s and ’50s, when several criminologists (notably Hans von Hentig, Benjamin Mendelsohn, and Henri Ellenberger) examined victim-offender interactions and stressed reciprocal influences and role reversals. These pioneers raised the possibility that certain individuals who suffered wounds and losses might share some degree of responsibility with the lawbreakers for their own misfortunes. For example, the carelessness of some motorists made the tasks of thieves easier; reckless behaviour on the part of intoxicated customers in a bar often attracted the attention of robbers; and provocation by some brawlers caused confrontations to escalate to the point that the instigator was injured or even killed. More controversially, women were sometimes said to bear some responsibility for misunderstandings that evolved into sexual assaults. By systematically investigating the actions of victims, costly mistakes could be identified and risk-reduction strategies could be discerned. Furthermore, those who stress the culpability of injured parties for their victimization, such as defense attorneys, tended to argue in favour of mitigating the punishment of offenders.
Although the field originally focused on the varying degrees of victim blameworthiness, by the 1970s this preoccupation became overshadowed by studies intended to prevent victimization, to improve the way complainants are handled by the police and courts, and to speed recovery. Victimology is enriched by other fields of study, particularly psychology, social work, sociology, economics, law, and political science. Whereas lawyers, criminal justice officials, counselors, therapists, and medical professionals provide the actual services, victimologists study the kinds of help injured parties need and the effectiveness of efforts intended to make them “whole again,” both financially and emotionally. Victims of murder, rape, spousal abuse, elder abuse, child abuse, and kidnapping have received the most research attention, but entire categories of victims that were formerly overlooked have been rediscovered (e.g., people with disabilities that make them unusually vulnerable and targets of workplace violence, hate crimes, and terrorist attacks). Other groups have been discovered and protected, such as individuals who have fallen victim to identity theft.
One focus of victimology has centred on identifying and measuring the frequency (both annual incidence and lifetime prevalence rates) of various types of victimizations, such as stalking, date rape, and carjacking. Some research has focused on the related challenge of explaining why the risks of violent victimization vary so dramatically from group to group, especially by age, gender, social class, race, ethnicity, and area of residence (mostly as a result of exposure to dangerous persons because of routine activities as well as lifestyle choices). Another area of concern to victimologists is how the legal system (e.g., detectives in specialized squads, victim-witness assistance programs administered by the offices of prosecutors, and state-administered financial compensation programs) deals with victims in their capacity as witnesses for the government. Victimologists have documented how the interests and needs of injured parties have been routinely overlooked historically but are now being addressed because the victims’ rights movement has won concessions that empower victims within the justice system.
Victimologists have evaluated the numerous projects initiated since the early 1970s by advocacy and self-help groups (e.g., battered women’s shelters and rape-crisis centres) and the legislation that has enabled victims to have greater input into the decision-making process that resolves their cases (e.g., over such matters as sentencing and parole). The field also explores the social reaction to the plight of victims by the media, by businesses marketing protective products and services, and by political groups urging ostensibly “pro-victim” reforms and legislation. In addition, victimologists study the impulse toward vigilantism in retaliation for past wrongs as well as the opposite tendency—that is, a willingness to accept restitution as a prerequisite for mutual reconciliation—which is the foundation of the alternative paradigm of restorative justice. Restorative justice relies upon mediation, negotiation, dialogue, and compromise to build a consensus within a community that the wrongdoer must accept responsibility for actions taken and make genuine efforts to assist injured parties and repair any damage to harmonious relations.
Victimologists often collect their own data, but they also analyze the detailed information provided by government agencies that collect official crime statistics based either on incidents reported to police departments (such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s annual Uniform Crime Reports) or on incidents disclosed to survey interviewers by respondents who are part of a large representative sample of a cross-section of the public (such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ National Crime Victimization Survey).
