W. Lloyd Warner, in full William Lloyd Warner,  (born Oct. 26, 1898, Redlands, Calif., U.S.—died  May 23, 1970, Chicago, Ill.), influential American sociologist and anthropologist who was noted for his studies on class structure.
Warner studied at the University of California at Berkeley, majoring in anthropology. While pursuing graduate studies at Harvard University (1925–35), he taught at Harvard and Radcliffe. There he began to do research on the social life of communities in New England, the South, and, later, the Midwest, focusing on race relations, class structure, and symbolic behaviour. This brought about his definition of three social classes: lower, middle, and upper, with each of these classes further divided into upper and lower.
He was professor of anthropology and sociology at the University of Chicago (1939–59), where he established the influential Committee on Human Development, and professor of social research at Michigan State University from 1959. Considered one of the leading sociologists in the United States, he adapted the research methods of cultural anthropology to contemporary social problems. His contributions to the understanding of contemporary American culture reflect his interest in the study of class structure, symbol systems, and human motivation.
His discoveries are presented in many publications, including Democracy in Jonesville (1949), a study in equality and inequality, and Social Class in America (1949), which is a manual of procedures for the measurement of social study. His fundamental conclusions are presented in American Life: Dream and Reality, written in 1953 and revised in 1962. He also did an anthropological study of an Australian Aboriginal people, whose social organization and religion are analyzed in A Black Civilization (1958). The Living and the Dead, a study of the symbolic behaviour of Americans and considered one of his most important works, was published in 1959. The Emergent American Society, which he edited, was published in 1967.
Warner’s studies of the social class systems within American society became a model for administrators of governmental and institutional programs. He attempted to comprehend the complexities of social stratification as well as economic institutions and human traditions.
