Westboro Baptist Church,  church in Topeka, Kansas, that became well known for its strident opposition to homosexuality and the gay rights movement, as expressed on picket signs carried by church members at funerals and other events. The church also demonstrated against other religions, most notably Judaism. It condoned such tragedies as the September 11 attacks (2001) and the mass shooting at an elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut (2012), as God’s retribution for sin. The church’s statements were widely condemned as hate speech, and some watchdog organizations branded the church as a hate group.
Westboro Baptist Church was founded in 1955 by Fred Waldron Phelps, who served as its pastor for many years thereafter. Even after Phelps’s death in 2014, his extended family was believed to constitute most of the membership—probably fewer than 100 people in all. The church described itself as an “old-school (or primitive) Baptist Church.” Like many other Primitive Baptist churches, it was independent and unaffiliated with any organized denomination. The church claimed that its theology was based on a strict interpretation of Calvinist principles.
The Westboro church began picketing in June 1991 at Gage Park in Topeka, allegedly a gathering place for homosexuals. The church first attracted attention throughout the United States in October 1998 when it picketed the funeral of Matthew Shepard, a gay college student from Wyoming whose murder was widely condemned as a hate crime. In 2005 church members began picketing the funerals of U.S. soldiers killed in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, carrying such signs as “Thank God for Dead Soldiers” and “God Hates the U.S.” In 2011 the U.S. Supreme Court upheld their free speech right to express opinions, however offensive, on “matters of public concern.” A number of legislatures responded to the picketing by establishing funeral buffer zones within which protest activity was prohibited. Canada and the United Kingdom have barred members of the church from entering their countries.
