William Booth,  (born April 10, 1829, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, Eng.—died  Aug. 20, 1912, London), founder and general (1878–1912) of the Salvation Army.
The son of a speculative builder, Booth was apprenticed as a boy to a pawnbroker. At 15 he underwent the experience of religious conversion and became a revivalist preacher. In 1849 he went to London, where he worked in a pawnbroker’s shop at Walworth, hating the business but bound to it by the necessity of sending money home. At this period he met Catherine Mumford, his future wife and lifelong helpmate (see Booth, Catherine). In 1852 he had become a regular preacher of the Methodist New Connection, and in 1855 they were married. After nine years of ministry Booth broke loose from the New Connection and began his career as an independent revivalist.
Booth held the simple belief that eternal punishment was the fate of the unconverted. Coupled with this was a profound pity for the outcast and a hatred of dirt, squalor, and suffering. In 1864 Booth went to London and continued his services in tents and in the open air and founded at Whitechapel the Christian Mission, which became (in 1878) the Salvation Army. Booth modeled its “Orders and Regulations” on those of the British army. Its early “campaigns” excited violent opposition; a “Skeleton Army” was organized to break up the meetings, and for many years Booth’s followers were subjected to fines and imprisonment as breakers of the peace. After 1889 these disorders were little heard of. The operations of the Army were extended in 1880 to the United States, in 1881 to Australia, and later to the European continent, to India, to Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), and elsewhere—General Booth himself being an indefatigable traveler, organizer, and speaker.
In 1890 General Booth published In Darkest England, and the Way Out, in which he had the assistance of William Thomas Stead. He proposed to remedy pauperism and vice by means of: homes for the homeless; training centres to prepare emigrants for oversea colonies; rescue homes for fallen women; homes for released prisoners; legal aid for the poor; and practical help for the alcoholic. There was vast public support for the program; money was liberally subscribed, and a large part of the scheme was carried out. The opposition and ridicule with which Booth’s work was for many years received gave way, toward the end of the 19th century, to very widespread sympathy as its results were more fully realized. The active encouragement of King Edward VII, at whose insistence in 1902 he was invited officially to be present at the coronation ceremony, marked the completeness of the change; and when, in 1905, General Booth went through England, he was received in state by the mayors and corporations of many towns. The fiery old man had become a great figure in English life.
