Winifred Holt,  (born Nov. 17, 1870, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died June 14, 1945, Pittsfield, Mass.), American welfare worker whose steadfast efforts helped to increase understanding of the capabilities of blind people and to make vocational training available to them.
Holt was a daughter of publisher Henry Holt. She was educated in private schools and, informally, by the artists and writers who were frequent guests of her parents. While on an extended visit to Italy in the mid-1890s to convalesce from one of her many illnesses, she discovered a talent for sculpture, and after her return to New York in 1897 she studied with Augustus Saint-Gaudens and others. On another trip to Italy in 1901 she encountered at a concert a group of blind students to whom the government had provided unsold tickets. Their obvious enjoyment deeply impressed her, and after her return to New York in 1903 she established the Ticket Bureau for the Blind to provide concert and theatre tickets.
During 1904–05 Holt attended the Royal Normal College and Academy of Music for the Blind in London, and in November 1905 she and her sister Edith organized the New York Association for the Blind, of which Winifred Holt remained secretary until 1914. At a time when blind people were believed capable only of accepting charity, the new organization devoted itself to educating the public, both sighted and unsighted, to the possibilities of rehabilitation and vocational training to make blind individuals self-supporting. (A committee within the association pursued a second objective, in cooperation with Louisa Lee Schuyler and others, and in 1915 became part of the National Committee for the Prevention of Blindness.) Winifred Holt’s fervid dedication to her chosen cause and her abilities as a public speaker and fund-raiser enabled the association to grow rapidly from a small group meeting at her home to a major welfare organization overseeing courses of instruction in sewing, typing and stenography, broommaking, piano tuning, and other marketable skills. The classrooms, workshops, and offices were moved from a rented loft to a permanent location, The Lighthouse, in February 1913.
The organization’s success owed much to Holt’s ability to enlist the active support of prominent persons: President William Howard Taft opened a fund-raising exhibit of blind workers’ skills and products at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1911 and dedicated The Lighthouse in 1913; and Elihu Root, Carl Schurz, Charles Evans Hughes, Richard Watson Gilder, Mark Twain, and Helen Keller (of whom Holt made a fine sculpture bust) were among others involved. She worked with the New York City Board of Education to end the segregation of blind children in separate classrooms and to introduce Braille teaching materials, and she founded a magazine, Searchlight, for children. Lighthouses were begun in several other American cities in imitation of the New York original, and during World War I Holt was engaged by the French government to establish Lighthouses in Bordeaux and Paris for blinded soldiers. The international Lighthouse movement eventually spread to some 34 nations. Holt’s many honours for her work included the gold medal of the National Institute of Social Sciences in 1914 and membership in the French Legion of Honor in 1921. In 1922 she published The Light Which Cannot Fail, a record of her work. In November 1922 she married Rufus G. Mather, with whom she continued her activity in the Lighthouse movement.
