Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU),  militant wing of the British woman suffrage movement. WSPU was founded in Manchester in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst. Along with the more conservative National Union of Women’s Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), founded in 1897, the WSPU sought votes for women in a country that had expressly denied women suffrage in 1832.
Although English women had been allowed to vote in local elections and act on school boards since the 1880s, full political equality eluded them. The WSPU was impatient with the moderate NUWSS and with the intransigence of both the Liberal and Conservative parties, for whom the suffrage issue was a political football. The WSPU also found itself at odds with the Labour Party, although Labour maintained a high level of support for working-class women. The WSPU was determined to hold the government responsible for granting the women’s franchise and to blame the party in power for any delays. In 1905 the organization became aggressively militant following a Liberal Party meeting in which Emmeline’s daughter Christabel Pankhurst and factory worker Annie Kenney were arrested for heckling Sir Edward Grey. The movement attracted a lot of attention, most of it unfavourable, as its members staged huge marches and outdoor demonstrations, interrupted political meetings, chained themselves to the railings outside Parliament, and battled with the police. The public dubbed the WSPU suffragists “suffragettes.” The moniker was immediately embraced by the WSPU, which named its journal The Suffragette.
In 1908, WSPU members began a campaign of property destruction aimed largely at the existing power structure and designed for maximum publicity. Their activities included pouring acid in mailboxes, breaking windows, defacing artwork in the National Gallery, and tearing up golf courses. One suffragette vandalized the prime minister’s car. In 1913, at the Epsom Derby, suffragette Emily Davison moved onto the racetrack in front of a racehorse owned by King George, paying with her life to make a statement about wealth and power.
More than 1,000 suffragettes, including Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst, were imprisoned between 1908 and 1914. When arrested, many suffragettes drew additional public attention by staging hunger strikes, a tactic that prison officials countered by force-feeding them. In 1913 the British government passed the Prisoners’ Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health Act, which allowed prison officials to discharge the women when they were truly weak and then rearrest them as soon as they got their strength back. The act earned public opprobrium, quickly becoming known as the Cat and Mouse Act because it seemed, in its cruelty, to mimic the way a cat toys with a captured mouse.
In 1914 the WSPU ceased all agitation for women’s suffrage and threw its support behind the British war effort in World War I. Emmeline Pankhurst became an ardent militarist, and her followers in the WSPU were among those who handed white feathers—symbols of cowardice—to young men not wearing military uniform. The WSPU slowly faded from public attention during the war and was finally dissolved in 1917. In 1918, ostensibly in recognition of women’s war work, the British government granted suffrage to women over age 30. The full franchise was extended in 1928.
The WSPU was an inspiration to young members of the U.S. women’s suffrage movement, especially Alice Paul, founder of the militant National Woman’s Party. Paul had demonstrated and gone to jail with suffragettes in England between 1907 and 1910. She carried their lessons into picketing the White House in 1917, holding the party in power responsible for delays in granting suffrage, and in her own imprisonment and hunger striking.
