Women’s Equity Action League (WEAL),  former national women’s organization committed to improving the status of women in the United States through legal action and lobbying for institutional and legislative change. Established and incorporated in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1968 by Elizabeth Boyer and local members of the National Organization for Women (NOW), WEAL’s objectives were geared predominantly toward combating sexism in education and promoting the economic advancement of women. Much of WEAL’s membership grew from those who disapproved of NOW’s inclusion of “the right of women to control their reproductive lives” in its eight-point Bill of Rights. Abortion was a volatile issue for WEAL, which concentrated instead on the elimination of sex discrimination through education and litigation.
WEAL’s early mandate was to support the economic advancement of women, to encourage the enforcement of existing antidiscriminatory laws, and to examine instances—and find resolutions to—the educational, economic, and employment disparities faced by women in higher education. WEAL also promoted diverse career opportunities for young women, pressed for legal reviews of job discrimination, and worked to mobilize women for their cause. To achieve these goals, WEAL compiled complaints of sex discrimination and filed formal grievances against colleges and universities. Together with other feminist organizations, WEAL lobbied for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) and Title IX. WEAL published a national newsletter, The WEAL Washington Report, which outlined federal legislation pertinent to women, and published WEAL Informed to update its members on pending legislation.
By 1972, WEAL’s membership had significantly increased, and the WEAL Fund, a nonprofit, nonmembership organization, was established to assist WEAL financially. The amalgamation of WEAL and the WEAL Fund in 1981 marked significant changes in the organization and its mission. The remade WEAL was headquartered and incorporated in Washington, D.C. WEAL’s agenda continued to focus on workplace equity, the ERA, and Title IX, but its scope expanded to include women in the military, Social Security, violence, and health (including reproductive health). By the end of the 1980s, securing funding for its many initiatives had become more difficult, and WEAL dissolved in 1989.
