World Council of Churches (WCC),  Christian ecumenical organization founded in 1948 in Amsterdam as “a fellowship of Churches which accept Jesus Christ our Lord as God and Saviour.” The WCC is not a church, nor does it issue orders or directions to the churches. It works for the unity and renewal of the Christian denominations and offers them a forum in which they may work together in the spirit of tolerance and mutual understanding.
The WCC originated out of the ecumenical movement, which, after World War I, resulted in two organizations. The Life and Work Movement concentrated on the practical activities of the churches, and the Faith and Order Movement focused on the beliefs and organization of the churches and the problems involved in their possible reunion. Before long, the two movements began to work toward establishing a single organization. In 1937 the Faith and Order Conference at Edinburgh and the Life and Work Conference at Oxford accepted the plan to create one council. A conference of church leaders met in 1938 in Utrecht, Netherlands, to prepare a constitution, but World War II intervened, and the first assembly of the WCC could not be held until 1948. In 1961 the International Missionary Council united with the WCC.
The WCC’s members include most Protestant and Eastern Orthodox bodies but not the Roman Catholic Church, though there are often Roman Catholic delegates to meetings. The Southern Baptists of the United States are among Protestant nonmembers. The controlling body of the WCC is the assembly, which meets at intervals of approximately six years at various locations throughout the world. The assembly appoints a large central committee that in turn chooses from its membership an executive committee of 26 members, which, along with specialized committees and 6 copresidents, carries on the work between assemblies. The headquarters of the council, in Geneva, has a large staff under a general secretary.
The work of the WCC is divided into three main divisions: church relations, ecumenical study and promotion, and interchurch aid and service to refugees. Under these divisions are a number of groups and commissions, such as faith and order, the commission on the life and work of the laity in the church and on the cooperation of men and women in church and society.
