Wyclef Jean, byname of Nel Ust Wyclef Jean, original name Nel Ust Wycliffe Jean,  (born October 17, 1969, Croix des Bouquets, Haiti), Haitian rapper, producer, and philanthropist whose dynamic, politically inflected rhymes and keen ear for hooks established him as a significant force in popular music.
Born in a suburb of Port-au-Prince, Jean was raised by relatives after his parents immigrated to the United States. At age nine he and his younger brother joined their parents in Brooklyn, New York. The family moved to Newark, New Jersey, when he was a teenager. Jean’s father, a Nazarene minister, prohibited rap music and encouraged Jean to channel his musical talents into the church choir. Nonetheless, Jean joined Tranzlator Crew (later known as the Fugees), a rap group founded by Prakazrel (“Pras”) Michel and Michel’s friend Lauryn Hill, in the late 1980s.
Jean studied music at Five Towns College in Dix Hill, New York, before dropping out to concentrate on his rapping. He continued to perform with Michel and Hill, and in 1994 they released their debut album, Blunted on Reality. Though the album was only moderately successful, the trio continued to record and in 1996 released their sophomore effort The Score as the Fugees. The recording, which innovatively blended elements of jazz, soul, reggae, and hip-hop, sold more than 18 million copies and won two Grammy Awards.
The members of the group then embarked upon solo efforts, a trajectory some observers attributed to an ill-fated affair between Jean and Hill. In 1997 Jean released Wyclef Jean Presents the Carnival Featuring Refugee All Stars, which mirrored the syncretic style of his efforts with the Fugees. Between albums, he collaborated with performers including Carlos Santana, for whom he produced the song “Maria, Maria,” and Whitney Houston, for whom he cowrote the hit “My Love Is Your Love.” In 2000 Jean followed up with The Ecleftic: 2 Sides II a Book and in 2002 released Masquerade. Further efforts included Sak Pasé Presents Welcome to Haiti: Creole 101 (2004), Carnival Vol. II: Memoirs of an Immigrant (2007), Toussaint St. Jean: From the Hut, to the Projects, to the Mansion (2009), Carnival III: The Fall and Rise of a Refugee (2017), and Wyclef Goes Back to School, Vol. 1 (2019).
In 1998 Jean founded the Wyclef Jean Foundation (later known as Yéle Haiti). The organization raised money and engineered programs to assist victims of poverty in Haiti. Following the Haiti earthquake of 2010, Yéle Haiti raised several million dollars for those affected. Jean announced in August of 2010 that he would run for president of Haiti, but he was deemed ineligible because he was not a resident of the country. Yéle Haiti shuttered in 2012 following investigations by the New York attorney general’s office and by media outlets that concluded that little of the money raised by the charity had actually gone to assist victims of the earthquake.
Jean chronicled his life in Purpose: An Immigrant’s Story (2012; with Anthony Bozza).
