Young Italy, Italian Giovine Italia,  movement founded by Giuseppe Mazzini in 1831 to work for a united, republican Italian nation. Attracting many Italians to the cause of independence, it played an important role in the Risorgimento (struggle for Italian unification).
Mazzini, in exile at Marseille for his revolutionary activities, was prompted to found a new society because of the repeated failures of revolts led by the Carbonari (liberal secret societies). In contrast to the clandestine methods of the Carbonari and their dependence on foreign support, Young Italy was to be based on the moral and spiritual revival of the Italian people; it was to have a popular character and educate the people in their political role. The new movement was declared to stand for a republican government because, as its official program stated, “all the men of the nation are called by the law of God and Humanity to be free and equal brothers, and only a republic could assure this.” It also favoured a unitary state because “without unity there is not truly a nation, since without unity there is no strength.” To propagate these ideas, Mazzini published the journal Giovine Italia from 1832 to 1834.
According to Mazzini, the movement grew from 40 members at its 1831 beginnings to more than 50,000 by 1833. Young Italy spread rapidly in northern Italy (in Liguria and in Piedmont), where a high literacy rate made possible wide distribution of the society’s publication, but it always remained a middle-class movement.
Mazzini’s vision was not limited to Italy. In 1834 he started Young Europe to encourage the rise of national organizations throughout Europe as well.
Young Italy plotted conspiracies against the existing governments in Italy during the 1830s and the 1840s, but its revolts met with failure. The lack of popular support for insurrection as the road to independence discredited the society. In 1848 Mazzini himself replaced Young Italy with the Italian National Committee (Associazione Nazionale Italiana). After 1850, with Piedmont leading the struggle for unification, Mazzini’s influence declined. 
