Young Americans for Freedom (YAF),  American youth organization based on conservative principles, notably limited government, traditional social values, and free enterprise.
Young Americans for Freedom (YAF) began in September 1960 when activists met at William F. Buckley, Jr.’s home in Sharon, Connecticut, to form a national youth movement that embodied the “new” conservatism of the time, which advocated for, among other issues, economic libertarianism and social traditionalism and was strongly anticommunist. Those principles were outlined in what came to be known as the Sharon Statement. YAF chapters soon appeared on college campuses across the United States, and in 1961 the group began publishing the magazine The New Guard.
YAF proved instrumental in the selection of conservative Barry Goldwater over the more-liberal Nelson Rockefeller as the Republican candidate in the U.S. presidential election of 1964. Goldwater overwhelmingly lost, but the process inspired YAF chapters to mobilize on other issues. In 1965 the group began a campaign to discourage American companies from trading with communist countries. In addition, as anti-Vietnam War protests and civil rights activism spread across American campuses, YAF took up the conservative mantle. However, by the late 1960s the organization was facing internal division, and a number of members subsequently split from YAF and formed (1971) the Libertarian Party.
In 1974 YAF collaborated with the American Conservative Union to create the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), an annual event that later developed into one of the largest meetings of conservatives in the United States. YAF’s influence was perhaps greatest in 1980, when it supported Ronald Reagan—who had joined the group’s National Advisory Board in 1962—in his successful campaign to become president of the United States. By the mid-1980s, however, the organization had found itself again mired in organizational infighting, and over the next decade membership sharply declined as YAF struggled to regain its former impact and cohesiveness. As the organization entered the 21st century, it experienced renewed interest, in part as a result of the growing influence of CPAC and the rise of the Tea Party movement.
