Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, also spelled Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn ibn ʿAlī,  (born September 3, 1936, near Sousse, Tunisia—died September 19, 2019, Jiddah, Saudi Arabia), army officer and politician who served as president of Tunisia (1987–2011).
Ben Ali was trained in France at the military academy of Saint-Cyr and at the artillery school at Châlons-sur-Marne. He also studied engineering in the United States. From 1964 to 1974 he was head of Tunisian military security, a post that brought him into top government circles. In 1974 he began a three-year term as military attaché to the Tunisian embassy in Morocco. He then returned to Tunisia to become head of national security, and in 1980 he became ambassador to Poland. After his return, he was appointed state secretary for national security in 1984 and a cabinet minister in 1985. Ben Ali had gained a reputation as a hard-liner in suppressing riots in 1978 and 1984, and in 1986 he became minister of the interior, taking an active role in rooting out the Islamic Tendency Movement, an Islamist group blamed for a number of anti-government demonstrations. In October 1987 Pres. Habib Bourguiba appointed him prime minister. Bourguiba, who had ruled Tunisia since its independence from France in 1956, was ill and considered by many to be unfit to continue in office, and on November 7 Ben Ali deposed him in a peaceful coup.
Ben Ali was expected to favour a somewhat less secular government than Bourguiba’s, with a more moderate approach toward religious fundamentalists. In elections held on April 2, 1989, he received more than 99 percent of the votes. But in 1991 he banned Ennahda (“Renaissance”), a political party formed out of the Islamic Tendency Movement, and called for the suppression of Islamists. From that point on he came under increasing criticism for his human rights policies. As head of the Democratic Constitutional Rally (Rassemblement Constitutionnel Démocratique), he won reelection in 1994, 1999, 2004, and 2009, each time by an overwhelming margin.
In late December 2010, protests against poverty, unemployment, and political repression erupted in Tunisia, with many of the demonstrators demanding that Ben Ali resign. Dozens of protesters were killed in clashes with security forces, provoking outcry from human rights groups. In January 2011 Ben Ali made several attempts to placate the opposition by expressing regret for the deaths of protesters and vowing to create jobs, control food prices, and increase political freedom. On January 13 he acknowledged popular dissatisfaction with his administration by promising to step down as president at the end of his term in 2014. However, the protests continued to intensify, and on January 14 Tunisian state media announced that the government had been dissolved and legislative elections would be held in the next six months. When that failed to quell protests, Ben Ali stepped down as president and left the country, fleeing to Saudi Arabia.
It was widely suspected that Ben Ali and his family had built a fortune worth billions of dollars by illegally appropriating national assets and skimming wealth from most sectors of the Tunisian economy. Following Ben Ali’s departure, Tunisian prosecutors opened an investigation into the finances of Ben Ali and his relatives, and Switzerland agreed to freeze any of Ben Ali’s assets in Swiss banks. Several days after opening the investigation, the Tunisian minister of justice, Lazhar Karoui Chebbi, announced that the interim government had issued an international arrest warrant for Ben Ali and several members of his family. However, Saudi Arabia, where Ben Ali remained in exile, refused Tunisia’s request to extradite the former president.
In June 2011 a Tunisian court convicted Ben Ali and his wife, Leila Trabelsi, in absentia of having embezzled public funds and sentenced them to 35 years in prison. The trial, which lasted only a few hours, focused on large quantities of cash and jewels found in one of Ben Ali’s palaces. In a second trial held in July, Ben Ali was convicted of smuggling drugs, guns, and archaeological objects and sentenced to 15 years in prison.
In June 2012 a military court convicted Ben Ali in absentia and gave him a life sentence for his role in the killing of protesters in southern and central Tunisia, where protests had begun in 2010. In July he received another life sentence after being convicted at a second trial for his role in the killing of protesters in northern Tunisia and Tunis. He died, still in Saudi Arabia, in 2019.
