Vladimir Bekhterev, in full Vladimir Mikhaylovich Bekhterev,  (born Jan. 20 [Feb 1, New Style], 1857, Sorali, Vyatka [now Kirov], Russia—died  Dec. 24, 1927, Moscow, Russia, U.S.S.R.), Russian neurophysiologist and psychiatrist who studied the formations of the brain and investigated conditioned reflexes.
Bekhterev received a doctorate from the Medical-Surgical Academy of St. Petersburg in 1881 and then studied abroad for four years. He returned to Russia in 1885 to become professor of psychiatric diseases at the University of Kazan, where he established the first laboratory of experimental psychology in Russia the next year. He became professor of psychiatry at the Military Medical Academy in St. Petersburg in 1893 and founded a psychoneurological institute there in 1907, though he was forced to resign his professorship in 1913. He was restored following the Russian Revolution of 1917 and chaired the department of psychology and reflexology at the University of Petrograd (i.e., St. Petersburg) from 1918 until his death.
A competitor of Ivan Pavlov, Bekhterev independently developed a theory of conditioned reflexes, studying both inherited and acquired reflexes in the laboratory. Bekhterev’s most lasting work was his research on brain morphology and his original description of several nervous symptoms and illnesses. He discovered the superior vestibular nucleus (Bekhterev nucleus), as well as several other previously unknown brain formations. He also described numbness of the spine (Bekhterev’s disease) and new forms of spondylitis and other diseases.
Bekhterev founded the Nevrologichesky Vestnik (“Neurology Journal”), the first Russian journal on nervous diseases, in 1896. His insistence on a purely objective approach to the study of behaviour and his conviction that complex behaviours could be explained through the study of reflexes influenced the growing behaviourist movement of psychology in the United States. Among his more significant writings are Conduction Paths in the Brain and Spinal Cord (1882; 2nd ed., 1896) and Objective Psychology (1907).
