avoidance behaviour,  type of activity, seen in animals exposed to adverse stimuli, in which the tendency to act defensively is stronger than the tendency to attack. The underlying implication that a single neural mechanism is involved (such as a specific part of the brain, which, under electrical stimulation, seems to inflict punishment) remains only a hypothesis. Clearly, the same kinds of avoidance behaviour might result from different underlying physiological mechanisms. Thus, although the various dichotomies, or polarities, of behaviour such as positive and negative, psychoanalytic life and death instincts, and approach and withdrawal concepts may be logical or philosophical conveniences, they seem, nevertheless, to lack clear meaning physiologically.
Alternative usage defines avoidance behaviour by describing a number of patterns: active avoidance (fleeing), passive avoidance (freezing stock-still or hiding), and a pattern of protective reflexes, as seen in the startle response. There is good reason to suppose that, in cats, for example, each of these patterns is coordinated separately by the brain. One kind of fleeing, in which the cat moves continuously and shows much upward climbing, is produced by electrical stimulation of specific parts of the brain (hypothalamic sites). Stimulation of other sites (in the thalamus) generates other types of fleeing movements, causing the animal to crouch, look around, move, slink close to the floor, and hide, if possible. In general, among birds and mammals, brain sites for fleeing of the first type occur in hypothalamic and mesencephalic zones.
Protective reflexes in mammals include ear retraction to a position of safety—pressed against and somewhat behind the skull—as when a horse is seen to lay its ears back. Among the monkey-like bush babies (Galagos) the outer ear folds up laterally and longitudinally at the same time, under threat. The eyes are closed, and the muscles around the eye are contracted, adding to the protection. During this so-called startle reflex, breathing is checked, and the mouth corners are pulled back to expose the teeth; this prepares both for biting in defense and also for movements of the tongue and for head shaking to free the mouth of any dangerous or distasteful substance that may have been taken in. In most mammals, the limbs flex as if ready for a leap; in the human startle reflex, the arms are thrust outward as if ready to grasp at a support.
It is helpful to consider avoidance behaviour in terms of factors that elicit it (e.g., specific stimuli) and regulate it (e.g., hormones).
Warning calls and visual signals that are unique to different species of birds and mammals effectively and specifically evoke avoidance patterns. In some cases, learning clearly emerges as a factor; thus, members of a colony of birds seem to learn to respond to the alarm calls of all species present in the colony. Among ducklings, a visual model to evoke fleeing and hiding can be fashioned as a cardboard cutout. When moved overhead in one direction, the model resembles a short-necked, long-tailed hawk, and the ducklings flee from it; when moved in the other direction, the model looks like a harmless, long-necked goose, and the ducklings tend to stay calm. The model is effective, however, in eliciting the two kinds of behaviour only when the ducklings are accustomed to geese flying over but not hawks.
Innate factors also contribute to such responses (see instinct). Domestic chicks, for example, show crouching and freezing in response to the long alarm call of their species. Many of the perching birds (passerines) will gather to mob when stimulated by the sight of an owl. The eyes in the characteristic owl face have been found to be especially important; even birds reared in isolation respond to man-made models with appropriate eyespots painted on. It has been suggested that many human beings are specifically (and perhaps instinctively) disturbed by the sight of snakes—the notion of a legless object perhaps being a key stimulus. Human responses to spiders and centipedes with conspicuous legs also may be intense. In the reaction to snakes at least, notwithstanding Freudian explanations that they symbolize male sex organs, the behaviour of people may be compared with owl mobbing among passerine birds.
Specific chemical signals can induce avoidance behaviour; some are released by minnows and tadpoles when their skin is damaged (usually indicating to fellows that there is danger). These chemicals appear to be specific for each species of fish and are highly effective in producing fleeing (see chemoreception). Many ants produce volatile alarm substances (terpenes) that are attractants to other ants at low concentrations and, in high concentrations near their source, produce rapid locomotion, defense postures, and, sometimes, fleeing. Some invertebrate avoidance responses are reflexes evoked by very specific stimuli; rapid swimming by cockles clapping their shells, for example, is elicited by starfish extract. Shell jerking is produced in a freshwater snail (Physa) by contact with a leech, another specific response to a major predator.
Painful stimuli are preeminent among those that produce avoidance. Among mammals (including man) many such responses are patently inborn, as is the reflex withdrawal of one’s finger from a hot griddle.
To classify a stimulus as startling or novel requires some comparison with previous stimulation. Human responses (orientation reflex) to startling or interesting stimuli may be studied by presenting a series of repeated tones; the orientation reflex tends to appear at the moment at which some change in the usual sequence (such as a longer or shorter tone) occurs. There is some evidence that the hippocampus (a brain structure) is involved in the human experience of novelty. Surgical removal of the hippocampus in many animals makes avoidance responses to strange objects far more persistent; a comparable operation in small parrots (lovebirds) greatly increases the persistence of calls that gather others for mobbing. Probably the hippocampus takes part in establishing memory of any new stimulus, and once this has occurred, the stimulus is no longer novel. Removal of other brain structures (the amygdala) reduces avoidance of strange objects (e.g., in lovebirds) and also makes fleeing and defensive attack less likely.
