Child mental health,  the complete well-being and optimal development of a child in the emotional, behavioral, social, and cognitive domains. Children’s mental health is often defined as different from adult mental health and more multifaceted because of the unique developmental milestones that children experience. Characteristics of the child (e.g., gender, genetics) are important determinants of that child’s well-being. However, child mental health also includes those conditions that directly affect or modify mental health, including aspects of a child’s family, community, and broader society.
The mental health problems children may experience may be reflected as difficulties in psychological and emotional development, social relationships, and behaviour. When problems are persistent, are severe, and cause impaired functioning, they are defined as mental health disorders. Well-designed mental health promotion and prevention programs and interventions can enhance the well-being of children and mitigate the escalation of problems.
A child’s well-being is influenced by a variety of protective and risk factors. Fostering psychological and emotional fitness is an important part of mental health. Children with stable mental health are able to develop emotionally and cognitively, form effective social relationships with others, and cope with problems. Protective factors are child and environmental characteristics that enhance positive mental health outcomes by protecting children and reducing the negative effects created by risk factors. Protective factors can be characterized as child, family, and community strengths that contribute to resilience. Child strengths can include healthy physical status, intelligence, and a relaxed temperament. Family strengths are those characteristic of a cohesive and supportive family (e.g., nurturing parenting style, supervision, socioeconomic advantage). Community strengths can encompass safe schools and participation in recreational activities.
The impact of risk factors often leads to poor mental health outcomes in children. The presence of multiple risk factors increases a child’s vulnerability to experiencing a problem. Risks may stem from premature birth and low birth weight, poor physical health, ethnicity, peer and family relationships, parental mental health status (especially the mother’s), parental abuse of alcohol or drugs, and family violence. Many experts cite socioeconomic status (i.e., parental education or income) as a strong predictor of psychological well-being. In addition, particularly vulnerable groups of children are those who have been physically or sexually abused, those in foster care, and child refugees. Another vulnerable group of children comprises those with learning disabilities. Children with a learning difficulty (e.g., problems in learning and understanding compared with children of the same age) are at increased risk of developing a mental health problem.
Clinical definitions of children’s mental health focus on the identification and classification of disorders as well as their treatment. Mental disorders cause both diagnostically significant symptoms and functional impairment. Defined in this way, community prevalence rates indicate that 10 to 20 percent of children (and youths) may experience a mental disorder at any given time. Anxiety, attention, conduct, and depressive disorders are the most common types of childhood disorders. Some children may have more than one disorder (comorbidity). These conditions have a negative impact on children’s development and functioning in the home, school, and community. In some cases, childhood disorders also persist and can affect eventual adult productivity and functioning. The human and economic impact of mental health disorders places them among the most costly of health conditions.
Population-based research has confirmed that many children with mental health disorders do not receive the treatment they need. In the United States, for example, estimates based on a combination of epidemiological studies indicate that only 20 percent of children with disorders receive specialized services. In the United Kingdom, about one-quarter of affected children and youth receive mental health services. Unmet need is reflected in differential access, particularly for minority children, and may be a result of specific barriers that impede service use. Barriers that inhibit access to services often comprise the distance to care, the wait for treatment, and the stigmatization of mental illness. Other factors can include lack of parental knowledge of available resources and parent psychosocial functioning (e.g., depression). Furthermore, families who experience social adversity (e.g., family stress, lack of social support) may have great difficulty in accessing care. Children who live in single-parent or impoverished homes, who experience trauma such as child abuse, or whose families are mobile are significantly less likely to seek help for their mental health difficulties.
Difficulties with service use for children with mental health disorders have been emphasized in policy documents aimed at addressing these issues. Efforts to improve access to mental health services have been undertaken, such as systems of care, wraparound intervention (services that incorporate the child and family and their environments), and large-scale projects. Some experts have suggested a combination of population health and clinical strategies. This would involve a mix of universal promotion and prevention programs to foster optimal well-being for all children and more targeted interventions delivered in a strategic cost-effective manner. Some service models have emphasized holistic family-centred promotion strategies and care.
