Clinical psychology,  branch of psychology concerned with the practical application of research methodologies and findings in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders.
Clinical psychologists classify their basic activities under three main headings: assessment (including diagnosis), treatment, and research. In assessment, clinical psychologists administer and interpret psychological tests, either for the purpose of evaluating individuals’ relative intelligence or other capabilities or for the purpose of eliciting mental characteristics that will aid in diagnosing a particular mental disorder. The interview, in which the psychologist observes, questions, and interacts with a patient, is another tool of diagnosis.
For purposes of treatment, the clinical psychologist may use any of several types of psychotherapy. Many clinical psychologists take an eclectic approach, drawing on a combination of techniques suited to the client. Clinical psychologists may specialize in behaviour therapy, group therapy, family therapy, or psychoanalysis, among others.
Research is an important field for some clinical psychologists because of their training in experimental research and statistical procedures. Clinical psychologists are thus often crucial participants in studies relating to mental-health care.
Clinical psychologists work in a variety of settings, including hospitals, clinics, and corporations, and in private practice. Some specialize in working with mentally or physically handicapped persons, prison inmates, drug and alcohol abusers, or geriatric patients. In some settings, a clinical psychologist works in tandem with a psychiatrist and a social worker and is responsible for conducting the team’s research. Clinical psychologists also serve the courts in assessing defendants or potential parolees, and others are employed by the armed forces to evaluate or treat service personnel.
The training of clinical psychologists usually includes university-level study of general psychology and some clinical experience. In the United States, New Mexico became the first state to grant psychologists the right to prescribe medications for the treatment of mental disorders. Most clinical psychologists who do not have medical degrees, however, are barred by state laws from prescribing medications.
