Sir Cyril Burt, in full Sir Cyril Lodowic Burt,  (born March 3, 1883, Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, England—died October 10, 1971, London), British psychologist known for his development of factor analysis in psychological testing and for his studies of the effect of heredity on intelligence and behaviour.
Burt studied at the universities of Oxford and Würzburg before becoming in 1913 the first educational psychologist appointed by a governmental body in Britain, a position that led to the first child-guidance clinic in England. He joined the faculty of the University of London in 1924 and served as professor of psychology at University College in London from 1931 until his retirement in 1950. He continued to conduct research after his retirement, and he was knighted in 1946 (the first psychologist to be so honoured).
In 1909 Burt published his experimental tests on general intelligence, in which he used factor analysis to define the kinds of factors at play in psychological testing (factor analysis involves the extraction of small numbers of independent factors from a large group of intercorrelated measurements). His method of factor analysis was fully presented in The Factors of the Mind (1940). Burt’s studies convinced him that intelligence was primarily hereditary in origin, although social and environmental factors could play a secondary role in intellectual development. From the 1940s on, he published studies showing that levels of intelligence could be correlated with occupational levels among large groups of test subjects and that such intelligence levels were transmitted to these subjects’ offspring. His data seemed to demonstrate that occupational levels (and hence social class) are determined mainly by innate, hereditary levels of intelligence.
After Burt’s death, striking anomalies in some of his test data led some scientists to reexamine his statistical methods. They concluded that Burt manipulated and probably falsified those IQ test results that most convincingly supported his theories on transmitted intelligence and social class. The debate over his conduct continued, but all sides agreed that his later research was at least highly flawed, and many accepted that he fabricated some data. However, the soundness of his earlier work justified his reputation as the foremost pioneer of educational psychology in Britain.
