Daniela Schiller,  (born Oct. 26, 1972, Rishon LeẔiyyon, Israel), Israeli-born cognitive neuroscientist best known for her research in the area of memory reconsolidation, or the process of re-storing memories after they have been retrieved.
Schiller, the youngest of four children, was raised in Rishon LeẔiyyon, Israel, near Tel Aviv–Yafo. As a teenager she spent a summer on a kibbutz (Israeli collective settlement). In 1991 Schiller joined the Israeli army, serving in the entertainment and education division as a producer of shows for active-duty soldiers. She completed her service in 1993 and subsequently became a producer of lectures and concerts on art, history, and science for the general public while also serving as a drummer for the Israeli rock band the Rebellion Movement.
Schiller earned both a bachelor’s degree in psychology and philosophy (1996) and a Ph.D. in cognitive neuroscience (2004) from Tel Aviv University. In 2004 she began working as a postdoctoral fellow at New York University, where she led a groundbreaking study that focused on memory reconsolidation. The study participants were repeatedly exposed to a neutral visual stimulus paired with a mild electric shock—a technique known as Pavlovian conditioning, or classical conditioning—which eventually resulted in the subjects’ experiencing fear after being exposed only to the visual stimulus. However, Schiller discovered that she was able to alter that emotional response, replacing the emotion of fear through the presentation of new information during reconsolidation, when memories are relatively unstable and therefore malleable. By introducing nonfearful information (e.g., the absence of electric shock) to participants upon presentation of the stimulus and the subsequent reactivation of fearful memories—a process known as extinction training—the memory was reconsolidated in a way that was no longer associated with fear. This breakthrough discovery presented a noninvasive method of blocking fearful memories in the absence of pharmacological interventions, which often produce a wide range of side effects. It thereby potentially afforded both a safer and a less-costly method of treatment for a variety of psychological disorders, such as post-traumatic stress disorder.
Schiller’s work was published in numerous scholarly journals, including The Journal of Neuroscience and the Journal of Psychiatric Research; she served as a contributing author for several books, such as The Human Amygdala (2009). Schiller was the recipient of multiple awards, including the New York Academy of Sciences Blavatnik Award for Young Scientists (2010) for her research on how to rewire the brain to eradicate fear as a response to memory. In 2010 she became a professor at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City, where she also directed the cognitive and affective neuroscience laboratory. She thereafter began utilizing magnetic resonance imaging to scan the human brain during memory consolidation and reconsolidation to identify the neurological links between fear and memory. Schiller has performed as a drummer for the Amygdaloids, an American rock band composed of New York University professors.
