Donald Davidson,  (born March 6, 1917, Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.—died August 31, 2003, Berkeley, California), American philosopher known for his strikingly original and unusually systematic treatments of traditional problems in a number of fields.
Davidson’s graduate work in philosophy at Harvard University was interrupted by three years of service in the U.S. Navy (1942–45). He was awarded a doctoral degree in 1949 and thereafter taught at various universities, including Stanford University and the University of Chicago, before settling at the University of California at Berkeley in 1981.
In his work on the philosophy of mind, Davidson accepted materialism but rejected the possibility of reducing the mental to the physical, or of replacing mentalistic language with the language of physical science. According to his doctrine of  “anomalous monism,” because causal laws are linguistic entities that apply to events under some descriptions but not others, it is possible for two events to be causally related—or even identical—though there is no causal law (in the strict sense) that captures this relation under the descriptions in question. In particular, events described in mental language can be causes or effects of—and indeed are identical to—events described in physical language, though there are no causal laws that relate pairs of events so described. Since a mental event is reducible to a physical event only if there is a strict psychophysical law that relates them, it follows that the reduction of the mental to the physical is impossible (see also reductionism; pluralism and monism).
In writing on the philosophy of language, Davidson adapted the definition of truth for formal languages given by the Polish-born logician Alfred Tarski (1902–83) as a criterion of adequacy for theories of linguistic meaning. Any such theory, Davidson argued, must generate theorems that express the truth conditions of any sentence in the “object language” in terms of sentences in a “metalanguage” (see semantics: Philosophical views on meaning). Davidson also developed sophisticated arguments against the possibility of conceptual relativism (the view that there are mutually unintelligible “conceptual schemes”) and global skepticism (the view that most or all of one’s beliefs about the world could be false).
Davidson’s papers were collected in four volumes: Essays on Actions and Events (1980), Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (1984), Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective (2001), and Truth, Language, and History (2005).
