Edouard Séguin,  (born January 20, 1812, Clamecy, France—died October 28, 1880, New York, New York, U.S.), French-born American psychiatrist who pioneered modern educational methods for teaching the severely intellectually disabled.
Born into a family of prominent physicians in Burgundy, Séguin was educated at the Collège d’Auxerre and at the Lycée St. Louis in Paris before studying medicine and surgery. From the start he was interested in mental diseases, and as a young doctor he worked with psychologists Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard and Jean-Étienne-Dominique Esquirol.
In 1839 Séguin opened the world’s first school for the severely intellectually disabled, where he developed a method of treatment, later widely accepted, based on the then-revolutionary premise that the intellectually disabled had neither diseased nor abnormal brains but simply suffered arrested mental development before, during, or after birth. Treatment, therefore, consisted of sensory training designed to permit the patient to function as well as possible in society.
Séguin’s school gained international renown and led to the formation of similar institutions throughout Europe and the United States. In 1846 he published Traitement moral, hygiène et éducation des idiots (“Mental Treatment, Hygiene, and Education of Idiots”), which was quickly recognized as a classic work in psychology.
Unhappy with the political atmosphere in France, Séguin immigrated to the United States, moving first to Ohio in 1850 but settling permanently in New York one decade later. He established several teaching institutions for intellectually disabled children, and in 1860 he set up his own medical practice at Mt. Vernon, New York. He received a medical degree from New York University in 1861. In 1863 he moved to New York City and began work with intellectually disabled children at Randall’s Island School for Mental Defectives. Séguin was the founding president of the Association of Medical Officers of American Institutions for Idiotic and Feebleminded Persons in 1876.
In 1866 Séguin published his second book, Idiocy and Its Treatment by the Psychological Method, and he instituted his ideas at the Séguin Physiological School in New York City, stressing sense and motor training. He wrote or collaborated in several books popularizing the use of the clinical thermometer. His son, Edward Constant Séguin, became a leading American neurologist.
