Eleanor J. Gibson, in full Eleanor Jack Gibson, née Eleanor Jack,  (born December 7, 1910, Peoria, Illinois, U.S.—died December 30, 2002, Columbia, South Carolina), American psychologist whose work focused on perceptual learning and reading development.
Gibson received a B.A. (1931) and an M.S. (1933) from Smith College and a Ph.D. (1938) from Yale University. She taught and did research primarily at Smith (1931–49) and Cornell University (1949–79). In 1972 she was named the Susan Linn Sage Professor of Psychology, becoming the first woman to be appointed to an endowed professorship at Cornell. In 1992 she received the National Medal of Science. The noted U.S. psychologist James J. Gibson was her husband.
Gibson saw perceptual learning as the differentiation of stimuli, as when, for example, a person perceives that the leaves of cottonwood trees and catalpa trees have different shapes. This understanding was in stark contrast to the then predominant behavioral view of perceptual learning as occurring through conditioning (the reinforcing of associations between stimuli). Gibson held that the environment provides sufficient information for the sensory system to develop increased discrimination of stimuli and that, with development, perception increasingly corresponds with the world.
In the late 1950s Gibson and Richard Walk, a professor at Cornell, developed the “visual cliff” experiment, which involved a specially constructed glass tabletop designed to give the appearance of a sharp drop-off. Gibson and Walk used the experiment to test visual depth perception in young animals, including human infants. The visual cliff subsequently became a major research tool in perceptual psychology.
Gibson also studied the acquisition of reading and writing skills through perceptual learning, looking at how children learned to read and write both letters and words. She held that children are active learners who receive positive reinforcement from the improved performance that comes with increasing mastery.
