Eugen Bleuler,  (born April 30, 1857, Zollikon, Switzerland—died July 15, 1939, Zollikon), one of the most influential psychiatrists of his time, best known today for his introduction of the term schizophrenia to describe the disorder previously known as dementia praecox and for his studies of schizophrenics.
Bleuler studied medicine at the University of Bern and later was appointed professor of psychiatry at the University of Zürich and director of the Burghölzli Asylum in Zürich, where he served from 1898 to 1927. He first advanced the term schizophrenia in 1908 in a paper based on a study of 647 Burghölzli patients. He then expanded on his paper of 1908 in Dementia Praecox oder Gruppe der Schizophrenien (1911; Dementia Praecox; or, The Group of Schizophrenias). He argued in this monograph that dementia praecox was not a single disease, was not invariably incurable, and did not always progress to full dementia. Each of these conclusions was at odds with the accepted wisdom of the time. He described a group of diseases, the schizophrenias, the basic symptoms of which were a disordered train of mental associations and splitting or fragmentation of the personality. He believed that many cases were latent (not fully expressed) and suggested that schizophrenics could in some cases have derangements of thought processes on specific questions rather than generally in all circumstances.
Bleuler is credited with the introduction of two concepts fundamental to the analysis of schizophrenia: autism, denoting the loss of contact with reality, frequently through indulgence in bizarre fantasy; and ambivalence, denoting the coexistence of mutually exclusive contradictions within the psyche.
Bleuler was an early proponent of the theories of Sigmund Freud, and he attempted to show how the various mechanisms Freud had found in neurotic patients could also be recognized in psychotic patients. Bleuler challenged the prevailing belief that psychosis was the result of organic brain damage, insisting instead that it could have psychological causes.
Bleuler’s Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie (1916; Textbook of Psychiatry) became a standard text and went through many editions. During the early 1900s Bleuler’s assistant was Carl Jung, and the two men were early members with Freud in the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society.
