George A. Miller, in full George Armitage Miller,  (born February 3, 1920, Charleston, West Virginia, U.S.—died July 22, 2012, Plainsboro, New Jersey), American psychologist who was one of the founders of cognitive psychology and of cognitive neuroscience (see cognitive science). He also made significant contributions to psycholinguistics and the study of human communication. One of Miller’s most famous discoveries was that human short-term memory is generally limited to holding seven pieces of information, plus or minus two.
Miller received a B.A. in history and speech (1940) and an M.A. in speech (1941) from the University of Alabama and an M.A. (1944) and a Ph.D. (1946) in psychology from Harvard University. While at Harvard he served in the Army Signal Corps during World War II. He later taught and did research at Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and Rockefeller University. In 1979 he joined the faculty of Princeton University, where he became professor emeritus in 1990.
After initially adopting the behavioristic framework that dominated experimental psychology in the United States from the 1920s through the 1950s, Miller came to find it too limiting. Whereas classical behaviorism had viewed the mind as impossible to study scientifically because its states and operations are not directly observable, Miller began to argue that mental phenomena were a legitimate subject of psychological research and that they could be studied through empirical and objective means.
In a famous paper, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information” (1956), Miller proposed as a law of human cognition and information processing that humans can effectively process no more than seven units, or chunks, of information, plus or minus two pieces of information, at any given time. That limit applied to short-term memory and to a number of other cognitive processes, such as distinguishing different sound tones and perceiving objects at a glance.
Miller stressed the importance of recoding—the reorganization of information into fewer units with more bits of information per unit—as a central feature of human thought processes. Recoding increases the quantity of data that one can process effectively and can help to overcome the seven-item information-processing limit. Miller held that the most common kind of recoding is verbal—what one relies upon when trying to remember a story or an event, for example. Thus, the story in 1 below may be verbally recoded as the story in 2:
In the recoded form the story is reduced to a basic framework, and the details (indicated in parentheses) are organized around the framework.
In 1960 Miller, Eugene Galanter, and Karl Pribram proposed that stimulus-response (an isolated behavioral sequence used to assist research) be replaced by a different hypothesized behavioral sequence, which they called the TOTE (test, operate, test, exit). In the TOTE sequence a goal is first planned, and a test is performed to determine whether the goal has been accomplished. If it has not been accomplished, operations are performed to achieve the goal. The test is performed again, and exit occurs if the goal is achieved. Otherwise, the process repeats.
TOTE had a significant impact on psychology, because it provided a realistic model of how humans pursue goals and carry out plans. Miller’s work encouraged researchers to abandon the more constricted, behaviorally oriented approach based on stimulus-response. The TOTE unit also served as the basis for many later theories of problem solving.
In the 1980s Miller helped to develop WordNet, a sizable online database of English words that displayed semantic and lexical relationships between sets of synonymous terms. Designed to simulate the organization of human verbal memory, WordNet was a widely used linguistic research tool.
Miller cofounded (with Jerome S. Bruner) the Harvard Center for Cognitive Studies in 1960 and helped to establish the Princeton Cognitive Science Laboratory in 1986. Several of his books, such as Language and Communication (1951) and Plans and the Structure of Behavior (1960), are considered influential. He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1957) and the National Academy of Sciences (1962). He received numerous honours and awards, including the National Medal of Science (1991) and the Outstanding Lifetime Contribution to Psychology Award from the American Psychological Association (2003).
