Institutionalized bias,  practices, scripts, or procedures that work to systematically give advantage to certain groups or agendas over others. Institutionalized bias is built into the fabric of institutions.
Although the concept of institutionalized bias had been discussed by scholars since at least the 1960s, later treatments of the concept typically were consistent with the theoretical principles of the new institutionalism (also called neoinstitutionalism) that emerged in the 1980s. Institutionalism is the process by which social processes or structures come to take on a rulelike status in social thought and action. 
Neoinstitutionalism, by comparison, is concerned with the ways in which institutions are influenced by their broader environments. It argues that leaders of organizations perceive pressure to incorporate the practices defined by prevailing concepts of organizational work that have become institutionalized in society.
Institutional theory asserts that group structures gain legitimacy when they conform to the accepted practices, or social institutionals, of their environments. For example, it is commonly accepted in the United States that organizations should be structured with formal hierarchies, with some positions subordinate to others. This type of structure is institutionalized. Many institutionalized practices are so widely shared, externally validated, and collectively expected that they become the natural model to follow.
American sociologists Paul DiMaggio and Walter W. Powell proposed that as fields become increasingly mature, the organizations within them become increasingly homogeneous. In trying to gain legitimacy, organizations adopt institutionalized structures and practices that conform to the normative environments, such as structuring with formal hierarchies. Institutional theory proposes that change in organizations is constrained by organizational fields, and when change occurs it is in the direction of greater conformity to institutionalized practices.
Organizations that conform to accepted practices and structures are thought to increase their ability to obtain valuable resources and to enhance their survival prospects because conforming produces legitimacy. When organizations structure themselves in institutionally illegitimate ways, the result is negative performance and negative legitimacy.
The Jim Crow laws are an example of an institutionalized practice. The laws mandated separate but equal status for black Americans in many southern and border states in the United States through much of the 20th century. State and local laws required separate facilities for whites and blacks, most notably in schooling and transportation. As more states and localities adopted the laws, the legitimacy of the laws was increased, leading more and more people to see the laws as acceptable. Indeed, a key argument in institutional theory is that the structures of many organizations reflect the myths of their institutional environments instead of the demands of their goals or work activities. Moreover, conformity to rules that are institutionalized often conflicts with efficiency needs.
Institutionalized bias gives less priority (or in some cases, no priority) than other approaches to norms and values. DiMaggio and Powell proposed that rather than norms and values, taken-for-granted codes and rules make up the essence of institutions. In this way, institutions shape the behaviour of individuals by providing taken-for-granted scripts. Individuals conform to institutionalized scripts not because of norms or values but rather out of habit. Thus institutionalized bias can exist in the absence of norms that advantage one group over another.
Another feature of institutionalized biases is that they can lead to accumulated advantages (or disadvantages) for groups over time. For example, institutionalized biases that limit the access of some groups to social services will in turn limit the extent to which members of those groups experience the benefits that result from receiving such services. Over time, those who received services may accumulate the benefits, whereas those who have been disadvantaged will remain so.
