Intimacy,  the state of being intimate, which is marked by the consensual sharing of deeply personal information. It has cognitive, affective, and behavioral components. Intimates reveal themselves to one another, care deeply about one another, and are comfortable in close proximity.
Self-disclosure, the sharing of private thoughts, dreams, beliefs, and emotionally meaningful experiences, is often viewed as synonymous with intimacy. However, self-disclosure is only half of the process; the other half is partner responsiveness. According to psychologist Harry Reis and colleagues, for a relationship to be intimate, self-disclosure must occur in a context of appreciation, affection, understanding, and acceptance. Indeed, an intimate experience has not taken place until there is empathic feedback—until acceptance and acknowledgment are communicated verbally or nonverbally as an indication that trust is justified.
In the absence of empathy, attempts at intimate support can miss the mark. Those making emotional disclosures usually want an emotional response. Those making pragmatic or factual disclosures often want a factual response. In the absence of empathy, emotional concerns may be met with a pragmatic or problem-solving response, or, conversely, pragmatism may be met with emotion. Studies suggest that emotional disclosures lead to greater intimacy than do factual disclosures. But regardless of kind, mismatched responses leave the discloser feeling misunderstood and devalued rather than affirmed and validated. Under these conditions, intimacy will suffer.
Research suggests that the capacity to establish affectional bonds begins in infancy and is rooted in the kinds of attachments that infants develop to their early caretakers. When caretakers are consistently responsive and warm, infants tend to develop a secure attachment style that may carry over into adulthood and be characterized by an ease in trusting and getting close to others. When parents are inconsistent and insensitive, children tend to develop anxious-ambivalent or preoccupied attachment styles. An anxious-ambivalent style in adulthood is characterized by overdependency, in which there is a desperate desire to merge with a partner alternating with a fear of not being loved sufficiently. When parents are cold and rejecting, children tend to develop an avoidant style. According to psychologist Kim Bartholomew, there are two types of avoidance—fearful and dismissive. Those who are fearfully avoidant in adulthood want intimacy but experience pervasive interpersonal distrust and fear of rejection. Those who are dismissively avoidant place much value on independence. They focus on work or hobbies and defensively assert that relationships are relatively unimportant.
Availability and quality of intimacy are associated with well-being for men and women alike. Studies showed that men who reported that they felt a lack of emotional support from their wives were far more likely to experience heart attacks. Several other studies showed that both men and women in relationships rated as high in intimacy were less likely to report symptoms of depression and anxiety than those in relationships rated as low in intimacy.
