Karen Horney, née Karen Danielsen,  (born September 16, 1885, Blankenese, near Hamburg, Germany—died December 4, 1952, New York, New York, U.S.), German-born American psychoanalyst who, departing from some of the basic principles of Sigmund Freud, suggested an environmental and social basis for the personality and its disorders.
Karen Danielsen studied medicine at the universities of Freiburg, Göttingen, and Berlin, taking her M.D. degree from the last in 1911. (In 1909 she married Oscar Horney, a lawyer, from whom she was separated in 1926 and divorced in 1937.) After a period of medical practice she became interested in psychoanalysis, and from 1913 to 1915 she studied and entered analysis with Karl Abraham, a close associate and disciple of Sigmund Freud. From 1915 to 1920 she engaged in clinical and outpatient psychiatric work in connection with Berlin hospitals, and in 1920 she joined the teaching staff of the newly founded Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute.
Although she adhered in the main to the outlines of Freudian theory, Horney early began to disagree with Freud’s view of female psychology, which he treated as an offshoot of male psychology. Unaffected by the worshipful awe that held many early Freudians to received dogma, she forthrightly rejected such notions as penis envy and other manifestations of male bias in psychoanalytic theory. She argued instead that the source of much female psychiatric disturbance is located in the very male-dominated culture that had produced Freudian theory. She introduced the concept of womb envy, suggesting that male envy of pregnancy, nursing, and motherhood—of women’s primary role in creating and sustaining life—led men to claim their superiority in other fields.
In 1932 Horney went to the United States to become associate director of the Institute for Psychoanalysis in Chicago. She moved to New York City in 1934 to return to private practice and teach at the New School for Social Research. There she produced her major theoretical works, The Neurotic Personality of Our Time (1937) and New Ways in Psychoanalysis (1939), in which she argued that environmental and social conditions, rather than the instinctual or biological drives described by Freud, determine much of individual personality and are the chief causes of neuroses and personality disorders. In particular, Horney objected to Freud’s concepts of the libido, the death instinct, and the Oedipus complex, which she thought could be more adequately explained by cultural and social conditions. She believed that a primary condition responsible for the later development of neurosis was the infant’s experience of basic anxiety, in which the child felt “isolated and helpless in a potentially hostile world.” The various strategies the child adopts to cope with this anxiety can eventually become persistent and irrational needs that cause both neurosis and personality disorder.
Many of Horney’s ideas, rooted as they were in her wide clinical experience, were translated into a new approach to psychoanalytic therapy. She sought to help patients identify the specific cause of present anxieties, thinking that it was just as important to the goals of psychoanalysis to deal with real-life, present-day problems as it was to reconstruct childhood emotional states and fantasies. In many cases, she suggested that the patient could even learn to psychoanalyze himself.
Her refusal to adhere to strict Freudian theory caused Horney’s expulsion from the New York Psychoanalytic Institute in 1941, which left her free to organize a new group, the Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis, and its affiliated teaching centre, the American Institute for Psychoanalysis. Horney founded the association’s American Journal of Psychoanalysis and served as its editor until her death in 1952. She also continued to write, further expounding her views that neuroses were caused by disturbances in interpersonal relationships in Our Inner Conflicts (1945) and Neurosis and Human Growth (1950). The Karen Horney Foundation was established in New York the year of her death and gave rise in 1955 to the Karen Horney Clinic. Horney’s analysis of the causes and the dynamics of neurosis and her revision of Freud’s theory of personality have remained influential. Her ideas on female psychosexual development were given particular attention after Feminine Psychology, a collection of her early papers on the subject, was published in 1967.
