Leo Kanner,  (born June 13, 1894, Klekotow, Austria—died April 3, 1981, Sykesville, Maryland, U.S.), Austrian American psychiatrist referred to as the “father of child psychiatry” in the United States. He is considered to be one of the most influential American clinical psychiatrists of the 20th century.
Kanner was born in a small town in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and in 1906 moved to Berlin, where he later received a medical degree from the University of Berlin in 1921. He moved to the United States in 1924, and from 1930 until his retirement in 1959 was on the faculty of Johns Hopkins Medical School, where in 1930 he founded the Johns Hopkins Children’s Psychiatric Clinic. His textbook Child Psychiatry (1935) remained a standard reference work for 50 years.
Kanner was perhaps best known for his description of “early infantile autism” in 1943 as a distinct clinical syndrome. On the basis of his observation of 11 children with similar behaviour, Kanner described a common profile whereby the children did not relate “in the ordinary way” to people or situations. Instead, Kanner described a child whose “behavior is governed by an anxiously obsessive desire for the maintenance of sameness that nobody but the child himself may disrupt on rare occasions.” Although he was to repudiate the term (and the theory behind it) by the 1970s, Kanner also coined the phrase “refrigerator mother” to describe the supposed emotional frigidity of parents who he thought caused, or at least contributed to, their children’s autistic behaviour.
After his retirement, Kanner remained professionally active. He served as a visiting professor at numerous universities and maintained a clinical practice until shortly before his death.
In addition to Child Psychiatry (1935), Kanner’s other publications include In Defense of Mothers: How to Bring Up Children in Spite of the More Zealous Psychologists (1941), Childhood Psychosis: Initial Studies and New Insights (1973), and his seminal journal article, “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact” (1943).
