Marshall B. Clinard, in full Marshall Barron Clinard,  (born November 12, 1911, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died May 30, 2010, Santa Fe, New Mexico), American sociologist and criminologist known for his research on the sociology of deviant behaviour, corporate crime, and gang formation. Clinard was one of the first to follow the white-collar crime research of American criminologist Edwin Sutherland. In the early 1950s Clinard examined whether black-market offenses carried out during World War II should be considered white-collar crime. He challenged Sutherland’s differential association theory by arguing that the personality characteristics of black-market offenders were equally likely to explain their behaviours. Clinard later made significant and long-standing contributions to the study of white-collar and corporate crime through his research with American philosopher and criminologist Richard Quinney.
Clinard’s early education was at Stanford University, and his doctoral training occurred at the famous “Chicago School,” officially the Department of Sociology at the University of Chicago, where he received a Ph.D. in sociology in 1941. He was a highly distinguished scholar in the discipline of sociology and the subfield of criminology. Clinard held academic positions at several universities, including the University of Iowa, the University of Wisconsin, and Vanderbilt University. In 1957 he published Sociology of Deviant Behavior, which became a leading textbook in the fields of sociology and criminology.
In the latter part of the 20th century, while at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, Clinard worked with Quinney to resolve ongoing definitional disputes, and their efforts resulted in the widely accepted division of white-collar crime into two distinct forms: corporate crime, which occurs on behalf of a corporation and benefits the corporation, and occupational crime, which is committed by individuals against their employing organizations, and benefits the individual offender. This typology articulated the appropriate unit of analysis for white-collar crime research: either the corporation or the individual. As a result, additional white-collar crime research focused on either corporate crime or occupational crime. This did not solve the definitional debates, but at least it added conceptual clarity to the field.
A subsequent research contribution made by Clinard resulted from his collaboration with American sociologist Peter Cleary Yeager on a study that was published in two forms: Illegal Corporate Behavior (1979) and Corporate Crime (1980). In the Sutherland tradition, Clinard and Yeager examined crimes committed by the 477 largest manufacturing corporations and the 105 largest wholesale, retail, and service corporations in the United States in the years 1975 and 1976. In that two-year time frame, these 582 corporations were the target of 1,553 federal cases. The implications of the study were staggering: due to the fact that the numbers were based only on cases brought against the corporations, they underestimated the true, total amount of corporate crime. To use the authors’ terms, the findings were merely “the tip of the iceberg.” The results confirmed Sutherland’s principal finding: corporations violate the law with great frequency. The results of these studies continue to provide a valuable context for researchers examining corporate crime.
In the course of his long and prominent career, Clinard wrote or cowrote more than 10 books, 40 articles, and 25 book chapters. His awards were numerous, and he was honoured by many leading academic and professional organizations in sociology, criminology, and white-collar crime, including the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences, the American Society of Criminology, the American Sociological Association, and the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.
