Mary Whiton Calkins,  (born March 30, 1863, Hartford, Conn., U.S.—died Feb. 26, 1930, Newton, Mass.), philosopher, psychologist, and educator, the first American woman to attain distinction in these fields of study.
Calkins grew up mainly in Buffalo, New York, and moved with her family to Newton, Massachusetts, in 1880. She graduated from Smith College in 1885, and after a European journey with her family, during which she briefly attended the University of Leipzig, she joined the faculty of Wellesley College in 1887. In 1890 she began advanced studies in psychology and philosophy at Clark University and then at Harvard University, where she studied under William James, Josiah Royce, and Hugo Münsterberg. She completed all the requirements for the Ph.D. and was recommended by the department for the degree in 1896, but Harvard declined to so honour a woman.
Beginning in 1890, she taught psychology at Wellesley. She advanced steadily, becoming professor of philosophy and psychology in 1898. In 1891 she established at Wellesley one of the earliest laboratories for experimental psychology in the country and the first in a women’s college. Her own work in the field dealt primarily with such topics as space and time consciousness, emotion, association, colour theory, and dreams. Her theory of “self-psychology” held, in contrast to the behaviourist view then in the ascendant, that the conscious self is the central fact of psychology. In the field of philosophy she acknowledged Royce’s idealism as the chief influence leading to her own system of “personalistic absolutism.”
Calkins’s writings encompass more than a hundred papers in professional journals of psychology and philosophy and several books, including An Introduction to Psychology (1901), The Persistent Problems of Philosophy (1907), which went through five editions, and The Good Man and the Good (1918). She was the first woman to be elected president of the American Psychological Association (1905), and in 1918 she was accorded a similar honour by the American Philosophical Association. Calkins retired from active teaching at Wellesley with the title of research professor.
