Mary Steichen Calderone, née Mary Steichen,  (born July 1, 1904, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Oct. 24, 1998, Kennett Square, Pa.), American physician and writer who, as cofounder and head of the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States (SIECUS), crusaded for the inclusion of responsible sex education in the public-school curriculum.
Mary Steichen, daughter of the photographer Edward Steichen, graduated from Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York, in 1925. After a failed marriage she attended the medical school of the University of Rochester, New York (M.D., 1939). She interned for a year at Bellevue Hospital in New York City and then studied at the Columbia University School of Public Health (M.P.H., 1942). In November 1941 she married Frank A. Calderone, a noted public health official.
After working as a school physician in Great Neck, New York (1949–53), Calderone became medical director of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. She traveled and spoke widely about birth control and family planning, and she directed the federation’s extensive research activities. She also wrote numerous articles for popular and professional periodicals, edited Abortion in the United States (1958), and wrote Release from Sexual Tensions (1960) and Manual of Contraceptive Practice (1964), a pioneering medical text.
In May 1964 Calderone cofounded and became executive director of SIECUS;  she resigned from Planned Parenthood two months later. The goal of SIECUS was to promote research, discussion, and education on the topic of human sexuality and thereby develop a mature and responsible public attitude toward its various aspects. SIECUS was particularly active in developing sex education materials for young people. Calderone remained executive director until 1975 and then served as president (1975–82).
From 1982 to 1988 Calderone was an adjunct professor of the program in human sexuality at New York University. She published two books dealing with children and sexuality, The Family Book About Sexuality (1981; with Eric W. Johnson) and Talking with Your Child About Sex: Questions and Answers for Children from Birth to Puberty (1982; with James W. Ramey). She continued to be a frequent and popular lecturer and was the recipient of numerous professional and humanitarian awards.
