Max Wertheimer,  (born April 15, 1880, Prague—died  Oct. 12, 1943, New Rochelle, N.Y., U.S.), Czech-born psychologist, one of the founders, with Kurt Koffka and Wolfgang Köhler, of Gestalt psychology (q.v.), which attempts to examine psychological phenomena as structural wholes, rather than breaking them down into components.
During his adolescence, Wertheimer played the violin, composed symphonic and chamber music, and generally seemed destined to become a musician. In 1900 he began to study law at Charles University in Prague but was soon drawn to the philosophy of law and then to the psychology of courtroom testimony. The following year he left Prague to study psychology at Friedrich-Wilhelm University in Berlin, under Carl Stumpf, noted for his contributions to the psychology of music.
Wertheimer received his Ph.D. from the University of Würzburg in 1904, developing a lie detector for the objective study of testimony and devising a method of word association as part of his doctoral dissertation. He then carried out research in various areas at Prague, Berlin, and Vienna, becoming particularly interested in the perception of complex and ambiguous structures. He discovered that feebleminded children can solve problems when they can grasp the overall structures involved, and he began to formulate the ideas that would later take root in Gestalt psychology.
While on a train trip in 1910, Wertheimer became intrigued by the phenomenon of perception of motion and stopped at Frankfurt long enough to buy a toy stroboscope with which to test his ideas. He noted that two lights flashed through small apertures in a darkened room at short intervals would appear to be one light in motion; this perception of movement in a stationary object, called the phi phenomenon, became a basis for Gestalt psychology. He studied the phi phenomenon with two assistants, Wolfgang Köhler and Kurt Koffka. Convinced that the segmented approach of most psychologists to the study of human behaviour was inadequate, Wertheimer, Köhler, and Koffka formed the new Gestalt school.
During his early work leading to Gestalt psychology, Wertheimer was on the faculty of the University of Frankfurt, leaving to become a lecturer at Friedrich-Wilhelm University in Berlin (1916–29). In 1921, with others, he founded Psychologische Forschung (“Psychological Research”), the journal that was to be the central organ of the Gestalt movement. Wertheimer returned to Frankfurt as professor of psychology (1929), directing research in social and experimental psychology. Wertheimer criticized the current educational emphasis on traditional logic and association, arguing that such problem-solving processes as grouping and reorganization, which dealt with problems as structural wholes, were not recognized in logic but were important techniques in human thinking. Related to this argument was Wertheimer’s concept of Pragnanz (“precision”) in organization; when things are grasped as wholes, the minimal amount of energy is exerted in thinking. To Wertheimer, truth was determined by the entire structure of experience rather than by individual sensations or perceptions.
Although much of Wertheimer’s work dealt with perception, the Gestalt school soon was extended to other areas of psychology, always emphasizing dynamic analysis and the relation of elements within a structured whole, taking as its basic attitude the concept that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Wertheimer fled from Germany to the United States shortly before the Nazis came to power in 1933. He became a professor at the New School for Social Research in New York City, where he remained until his death. During the last years of his life, Wertheimer devoted himself to problems of psychology and social ethics. His Productive Thinking, which discussed many of his ideas, was published posthumously in 1945.
