Peace psychology,  area of specialization in the study of psychology that seeks to develop theory and practices that prevent violence and conflict and mitigate the effects they have on society. It also seeks to study and develop viable methods of promoting peace.
The roots of peace psychology are often traced to William James and a speech he gave at Stanford University in 1906. With World War I on the horizon, James talked about his belief that war satisfies a deeply felt human need for virtues such as loyalty, discipline, conformity, group cohesiveness, and duty. He also observed that individuals who belong to a group, whether military or otherwise, experience a boost in self-pride when they are proud of their group. Most important, he argued that war is not likely to be eliminated until humans have created a “moral equivalent of war,” such as public service that allows people to experience the virtues that were associated with war making.
Many other psychologists and philosophers wrote about the psychology of peace. A partial list includes Alfred Adler, Gordon Allport, Jeremy Bentham, James McKeen Cattell, Mary Whiton Calkins, Sigmund Freud, William McDougall, Charles Osgood, Ivan Pavlov, and Edward Tolman. Even Pythagoras would qualify, because of his writings on nonviolence and appreciation for the more-insidious form of violence called structural violence, which kills people slowly by depriving them of basic need satisfaction (e.g., poverty).
A recurrent theme among peace psychologists has been that war is built, not born, and the related idea that war is biologically possible but not inevitable. Those ideas are captured in a number of manifestos issued by psychologists. One statement was signed by almost 4,000 psychologists after World War II. Another, the Seville Statement, was issued in 1986 by 20 highly respected scientists during the United Nations International Year of Peace. Because war is built or constructed, a great deal of research in peace psychology has sought to identify environmental conditions that are linked to violence and peaceful behaviour.
Peace psychology was given a significant boost during the Cold War (c. mid-1940s through the early 1990s), when the conflict between the United States and Soviet Union heated up and the threat of nuclear annihilation seemed imminent, leading psychologists to create concepts to better understand intergroup conflict and its resolution. Also important was the establishment of the 48th division of the American Psychological Association, called Peace Psychology, in 1990. Shortly thereafter, a journal was established, Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology. Since then, doctoral-level training programs in peace psychology have been established around the world.
Peace psychology is now global in scope. It recognizes that violence can be cultural, which occurs when beliefs are used to justify either direct or structural violence. Direct violence injures or kills people quickly and dramatically, whereas structural violence is much more widespread and kills far more people by depriving them of satisfaction of their basic needs. For example, when people starve even though there’s enough food for everyone, the distribution system is creating structural violence. If a person justifies the deaths of starving people by blaming them for their situation (called blaming the victim), that person is engaging in cultural violence. Direct violence is supported by the culturally violent notion of just war theory, which argues that under certain conditions, it is acceptable to kill others (e.g., defense of the homeland, using war as a last resort). One of the main challenges for peace psychology is to deepen understanding of the structural and cultural roots of violence, a problem that is particularly important when security concerns revolve around the prevention of terrorism.
