Phil McGraw, byname of Phillip Calvin McGraw, also known as Dr. Phil,  (born September 1, 1950, Vinita, Oklahoma, U.S.), American psychologist, author, and television personality who gained fame following numerous appearances on The Oprah Winfrey Show and with his own daytime talk show, Dr. Phil.
McGraw attended the University of Tulsa, Oklahoma, on a football scholarship but turned his attention to psychology after an injury cut short his athletic career. He transferred and earned a B.A. (1975) from Midwestern State University in Wichita Falls, Texas. After receiving a master’s degree and doctorate in clinical psychology from the University of North Texas, McGraw launched a career as a psychologist. He joined his father, who was also a psychologist, and another partner to form a company that operated self-motivation and life-skills seminars throughout the country. Soon after establishing his own practice, however, McGraw realized that he did not have the patience for the subtleties and ambiguous time frames of traditional talk therapy. He closed the practice and began conducting corporate consultant work.
In 1989 McGraw and a lawyer friend launched Courtroom Sciences, Inc. (CSI), a firm that provided mock trial, jury selection, and mediation services to lawyers. CSI attained a national reputation after successfully guiding to victory the defense lawyers of the famed Exxon Valdez oil-spill trial. In 1996, when television talk-show host Oprah Winfrey was sued for defamation by disgruntled Texas cattlemen, her defense team sought out CSI’s assistance. McGraw and company coached Winfrey and her defense team, who eventually emerged victorious. In gratitude, Winfrey invited McGraw to appear on her show. Her audiences were so taken with his down-home charm and what they perceived as his razor-sharp psychological analyses—Winfrey took to calling him “Tell It like It Is Phil”—that he soon became a regular fixture on the show. McGraw was featured on Winfrey’s “Change Your Life” segments before graduating to weekly appearances as the main attraction on her hugely popular “Tuesdays with Dr. Phil.”
In 2002 McGraw started his own show, Dr. Phil, which was produced by Winfrey’s Harpo Studios, and the one-hour program was an immediate hit. McGraw—who eschewed psychobabble and touchy-feely approaches—continued to remind his viewers that what he was providing was education, not “eight-minute cures” or true psychotherapy. The program showcased McGraw’s talent for dispensing real solutions to real problems in his characteristically blunt but caring manner.
In addition to his television work, McGraw wrote a number of best-selling books, including Life Strategies: Doing What Works, Doing What Matters (1999), Relationship Rescue: A Seven-Step Strategy for Reconnecting with Your Partner (2000), Self Matters: Creating Your Life from the Inside Out (2001), The Ultimate Weight Solution: The Seven Keys to Weight Loss Freedom (2003), Family First: Your Step-by-Step Plan for Creating a Phenomenal Family (2004), Love Smart: Find the One You Want, Fix the One You Got (2005), and Life Code: The New Rules for Winning in the Real World (2012).
