Political spin,  in politics, the attempt to control or influence communication in order to deliver one’s preferred message.
Spin is a pejorative term often used in the context of public relations practitioners and political communicators. It is used to refer to the sophisticated selling of a specific message that is heavily biased in favour of one’s own position and that employs maximum management of the media with the intention of maintaining or exerting control over the situation, often implying deception or manipulation.
In the political context, it is often associated with government press conferences in which it is understood that the press secretary or the government official has a vested interest in communicating a political message to have a desired outcome, often to the neglect of delivering the full truth of a situation. In such situations, the press conference room is sometimes cynically referred to as the “spin room” and the schedule of briefings as the “spin cycle.”
Spin techniques may include careful timing in delivering information, selective presentation of facts, careful selection of words and phrases meant to invoke certain responses in hearers, choice of sound bites, or redefining of terms and phrases. Skillful practitioners of spin are sometimes pejoratively referred to as “spin doctors,” “spin merchants,” or “spinmeisters,” among other unflattering terms.
Famous and successful “spinsters” in the political arena have included Mike McCurry, who was press secretary to U.S. President Bill Clinton and has been called a “spinmeister extraordinaire” for his ability to maintain charm and wit while occasionally misleading reporters, intimidating and also courting correspondents, and managing a litany of damaging stories coming out of an administration mired in controversy.
Another well-known example to whom the label has been applied is Peter Mandelson, who was head of British Prime Minister Tony Blair’s publicity machine and successful political campaigns. He was considered ruthless in his management of the media in favour of Blair’s message and using the media to cast opposers in a negative light.
The rise of spin and media pressures has been said to be harmful to the political system in that it contributed to ongoing cynicism among journalists and the voting public as politics came to be increasingly viewed more as theatre than governing. In the early 21st century, concern over the effects of spin manifested in the popular culture with the rise of talk shows, talk show personalities, and self-proclaimed “fact-checkers.” Examples include American television and radio personality Bill O’Reilly and his show No Spin Zone and numerous Web sites proclaiming to help a cynical and unsuspecting public unravel the barrage of political spin.
