Psychomotor learning,  development of organized patterns of muscular activities guided by signals from the environment. Behavioral examples include driving a car and eye-hand coordination tasks such as sewing, throwing a ball, typing, operating a lathe, and playing a trombone. Also called sensorimotor and perceptual-motor skills, they are studied as special topics in the experimental psychology of human learning and performance. In research concerning psychomotor skills, particular attention is given to the learning of coordinated activity involving the arms, hands, fingers, and feet (verbal processes are not emphasized).
The term skill denotes a movement that is reasonably complex and the execution of which requires at least a minimal amount of practice—reflex acts such as sneezing are excluded. Research shows that the performance of complex skills can be influenced by sensations arising from the things the performer looks at, sensations from the muscles that are involved in the movement itself, and stimuli received through other sensory organs. Thus the term sensorimotor skill is used to denote the close relationship between movement and sensation involved in complex acts.
Most of life’s skills are continuous and complex and contain a multitude of integrated components; however, these complex skills may be analyzed by examining their component parts. For example, skills may be measured by time intervals. In the laboratory, a subject’s reaction time is measured as the time between the presentation of some kind of stimulus and the performer’s initial response. The individual’s speed of reaction depends upon a number of variables, including the intensity of the stimuli. For example, a person will initiate a movement more quickly to increasingly louder sounds until a limit is reached. When the sounds become too loud, however, the noise delays the onset of the movement. A longer reaction time will also be recorded if the subject must choose among a number of stimuli before initiating a movement (such as moving only if one of a number of various coloured lights is turned on) or if the required act involves a complex movement.
The quality of the movement will depend upon such factors as the precision of the act required, the performer’s past experience with similar skills, the speed of the movement, the force of the motor act, and the body part or parts to be moved.
There are limits to the efficient performance of even the simplest motor skills. Finger tapping at more than 10 times per second, for example, is usually impossible. Individuals vary greatly in their ability to exercise force with various body parts. Studies of the human motor system also show that an individual rarely (if ever) repeats an apparently similar movement in precisely the same way. Thus the acquisition of skill in a given task involves the performance of a reasonably consistent response pattern, which varies, within limits, from trial to trial.
A number of basic motor abilities underlie the performance of many routine activities. One category of abilities may be broadly referred to as manual dexterity, which includes fine finger dexterity, arm-wrist speed, and aiming ability. Motor abilities are also influenced by strength, of which there are several kinds, including static strength (pressure measured in pounds exerted against an immovable object) and dynamic strength (moving the limbs with force). Flexibility and balancing ability are similarly divided into several components. Thus discussion of a single quality in human movement is inaccurate. One should refer instead to several specific types of ability.
Motor skills may also be classified by the general characteristics of the tasks themselves. Gross motor skills refer to acts in which the larger muscles are commonly involved, while fine motor skills denote actions of the hands and fingers. Most skills incorporate movements of both the larger and the smaller muscle groups. The basketball player uses his larger skeletal muscles to run and jump while drawing on fine motor skills such as accurate finger control when dribbling or shooting the ball.
Most of life’s skills are composed of several integrated parts. Such skills are often controlled by the organization of visual information available to the performer, particularly during the early stages of learning. At the same time, the individual’s ability to analyze the mechanics of a motor task, his verbal ability, and other intellectual and perceptual attributes may influence his acquisition of a skill.
Skills are susceptible to all kinds of limits. If there is sufficient genetic aptitude, a person’s mastery of a skill depends on his motivation to improve, on his receiving continuous information or sensory feedback about the adequacy of his performance during training, and on such factors as the rewarding effects of corrections made during successive practice periods. Some gains in proficiency can be masked by temporary losses but will emerge later.
Psychomotor habits are mediated primarily by the sensory and motor cortex of the brain and by the neural fibres that connect the two cerebral hemispheres. According to the majority of theoreticians, learning outcomes can be correlated with the amount or duration of rewarded practice. The effects of associative and motivational factors are believed to enhance learning, while inhibitory and oscillation (variability) factors are thought to detract from the learning of psychomotor skills.
Most scientists study psychomotor learning under controlled laboratory conditions, which contribute to more accurate measures of proficiency and reduce the amount of variability in a learner’s performance as the training progresses. Hundreds of electrical and mechanical instruments have been developed for research in psychomotor learning, but only about two dozen are used with any regularity.
One device, a complex coordinator, measures the learner’s ability to make prompt, synchronized adjustments of handstick and foot-bar controls in response to combinations of stimulus lights. Another device, a discrimination reaction timer, requires that one of several toggle switches be snapped rapidly in response to designated distinctive spatial patterns of coloured signal lamps. In performing on a manual lever, a blindfolded subject must learn how far to move the handle on the basis of numerical information provided by the experimenter. With a mirror tracer, a six-pointed star pattern is followed with an electrical stylus as accurately and quickly as possible, the learner being guided visually only by a mirror image. The multidimensional pursuitmeter requires the learner to scan four dials and to keep the indicators steady by making corrections with four controls (similar to those found in an airplane cockpit). On a rotary pursuitmeter the learner must hold a flexible stylus in continuous electrical contact with a small, circular metal target set into a revolving turntable.
Also employed is the selective mathometer, a device on which the subject’s problem is to discover, with cues provided by a signal lamp, which of some 20 pushbuttons should be pressed in response to each of a series of distinctive images projected on a screen. While using a star discrimeter, a person receives information about his errors through earphones; the task is to learn to selectively position one lever among six radial slots in accordance with signals from differently coloured stimulus lights. A trainee on a two-hand coordinator has to manipulate two lathe crank handles synchronously to maintain contact with a target disk as it moves through an irregular course. Computers are now used for more precise measurements.
The tasks required by the above devices produce a substantial range of psychomotor difficulty. The elements of skilled behaviour are expressed as numerical scores that measure response and error percentages, amplitude and speed of movement, hand or foot pressures exerted, time on target, reaction time, rate of response, and indices of time-sharing activity. Most of these measurements lend themselves to mathematical treatment. Laboratory devices for studying psychomotor learning can be useful in predicting performance in factory work and the operation of motor vehicles and aircraft. When properly maintained and used under standardized conditions, these perceptual-motor devices provide reliable measures of the activities they are designed to measure, and they also tap a significant proportion of the abilities required in real-life situations.
