Steven Pinker, in full Steven Arthur Pinker,  (born September 18, 1954, Montreal, Quebec, Canada), Canadian-born American psychologist who advocated evolutionary explanations for the functions of the brain and thus for language and behaviour.
Pinker was raised in a largely Jewish neighbourhood of Montreal. He studied cognitive science at McGill University, where he received a bachelor’s degree in psychology in 1976. He earned a doctorate in experimental psychology at Harvard University in 1979. After stints as an assistant professor at Harvard (1980–81) and at Stanford University (1981–82), he joined the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). There he served as codirector of the Center of Cognitive Science (1985–94) and, having been made full professor in 1989, as director of the McDonnell-Pew Center for Cognitive Neuroscience (1994–99). Pinker returned to Harvard in 2003 as a full professor.
His early studies on the linguistic behaviour of children led him to endorse noted linguist Noam Chomsky’s assertion that humans possess an innate facility for understanding language. Eventually Pinker concluded that this facility arose as an evolutionary adaptation. He expressed this conclusion in his first popular book, The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language (1994). The sequel, How the Mind Works (1997), earned a nomination for the Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction. In that book, Pinker expounded a scientific method that he termed “reverse engineering.” The method, which involved analyzing human behaviour in an effort to understand how the brain developed through the process of evolution, gave him a way to explain various cognitive phenomena, such as logical thought and three-dimensional vision.
In Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language (1999) Pinker offered an analysis of the cognitive mechanisms that make language possible. Exhibiting a lively sense of humour and a talent for explaining difficult scientific concepts clearly, he argued that the phenomenon of language depended essentially on two distinct mental processes—the memorization of words and the manipulation of them with grammatical rules.
Pinker’s work was received enthusiastically in some circles but stirred controversy in others. His strictly biological approach to the mind was seen as dehumanizing from some religious and philosophical perspectives; scientific objections were raised as well. Many of his colleagues, including paleobiologist Stephen Jay Gould, felt that the data on natural selection were as yet insufficient to support all of his claims and that other possible influences on the brain’s development existed.
Pinker at times directly replied to critics of his evolutionary approach to cognition in The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature (2002), also a Pulitzer Prize finalist. The book dismisses tabula rasa notions of human mental development, citing a large body of research indicative of the determinist role played by genes. While acknowledging the ethical quandaries raised by his corollary assertions that people of different genders and ethnicities might have different cognitive abilities due to the disparate evolutionary forces at work upon them, Pinker argued that such revelations need not impede equal treatment. His protestations did little to assuage the concerns of detractors who felt that the claims espoused in the book inevitably created hierarchical relationships between individuals of different backgrounds.
Pinker later illustrated the manner in which the structure and semantics of language reflect the human perception of reality in The Stuff of Thought: Language As a Window into Human Nature (2007). Drawing on a range of psychological and historical data, he contended that the modern era was the most peaceful in human history in The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined (2011), and he noted other positive developments of the early 21st century in Enlightenment Now: The Case for Reason, Science, Humanism, and Progress (2018). In The Sense of Style: The Thinking Person’s Guide to Writing in the 21st Century (2014), Pinker prescribed effective writing techniques while acknowledging and defending the necessary elasticity of language and grammar. Rationality: What It Is, Why It Seems Scarce, Why It Matters appeared in 2021.
