Temple Grandin,  (born August 29, 1947, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.), American scientist and industrial designer whose own experience with autism funded her professional work in creating systems to counter stress in certain human and animal populations.
Grandin was unable to talk at age three and exhibited many behavioral problems; she was later diagnosed with autism. Her parents, rejecting a doctor’s advice to place her in an institution, instead sent their daughter to a series of private schools where her high IQ was nurtured. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree (1970) in psychology from Franklin Pierce College (now Franklin Pierce University) in New Hampshire, she earned a master’s degree (1975) and a doctorate (1989) in animal science from Arizona State University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, respectively. From 1990 she taught animal science at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, where she also managed Grandin Livestock Systems.
Grandin possessed an awareness that intense fear, born of a hypersensitivity to sound and touch, is common both to autistic people and to animals, and she devoted her life to devising systems to alleviate the anxiety of both groups. While still in high school, she designed a “squeeze machine” to relieve her own nervous tension, modeling it on a chute fashioned to hold livestock in place during brandings, vaccinations, and other procedures. Improved versions of her machine were widely used not only in schools to soothe autistic children but also by autistic adults to comfort themselves.
Although brain scans had identified atypical areas in Grandin’s cerebellum that resulted in deficits in her short-term memory (she could not follow written instructions or pass subjects, such as algebra, that dealt with abstract concepts), the area associated with visual circuitry was found to extend far beyond that of a neurotypical brain, a factor that allowed her to maintain long-term visual memory. This aspect was vital to her main career focus—designing humane livestock facilities that would eliminate pain and fear from the slaughtering process. Her designs enabled workers to move animals without frightening them. She also maintained that her acute visualization could be harnessed in making design decisions regarding other matters. For example, she said that she never would have located backup emergency generators in the nonwaterproof basement of the Fukushima (Japan) power station (which was overwhelmed by a tsunami in 2011, an event that resulted in a nuclear meltdown) without first recommending the installation of proper safeguards, including reinforced submarine-like doors that could be manually cranked shut.
Grandin wrote several books, including Emergence: Labeled Autistic (1986; with Margaret M. Scariano), Thinking in Pictures, and Other Reports from My Life with Autism (1995), and The Autistic Brain: Thinking Across the Spectrum (2013; with Richard Panek). Calling All Minds: How to Think and Create Like an Inventor (2018) was for younger readers. She also edited and contributed to the volume Genetics and the Behavior of Domestic Animals (1998).
