Thanatology,   the description or study of death and dying and the psychological mechanisms of dealing with them. Thanatology is concerned with the notion of death as popularly perceived and especially with the reactions of the dying, from whom it is felt much can be learned about dealing with death’s approach. Thanatology (from Greek thanatos, “death”) as a professional discipline gathered momentum following the publication of several subject-related books including The Meaning of Death (1959), edited by Herman Feifel, and The Psychology of Death (1972) by Robert Kastenbaum and Ruth Aisenberg. Generally, psychologists have agreed that there are two overall concepts concerning death that help in understanding the simultaneous processes of living and dying. The “my death versus your death” concept emphasizes the irrational belief that while “your death” is a certainty, an exemption may be made in “my case.” The second concept, “partial deaths versus total extinction” stresses the belief that by experiencing the bereavement following the deaths of friends and relatives, a person is brought as close as possible to realizing “partial death.” These experiences colour the individual’s attitude toward greater personal losses, culminating with the ultimate loss, life itself.
In 1969 the Swiss-born psychiatrist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross conceptualized five stages in facing one’s terminal illness: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance. Although most thanatologists accept the Kübler-Ross stages, they also recognize that these stages occur neither with predictable regularity nor in any set order. Further, the five Kübler-Ross stages are but general reactions to many situations involving loss, not necessarily dying. Seldom does a dying person follow a regular, clearly identifiable series of responses. With some, acceptance may come first, then denial; others may cross over constantly from acceptance to denial.
Thanatology also examines attitudes toward death, the meaning and behaviours of bereavement and grief, and the moral and ethical questions of euthanasia, organ transplants, and life support.
