Walter Mischel,  (born February 22, 1930, Vienna, Austria—died September 12, 2018, New York, New York, U.S.), American psychologist best known for his groundbreaking study on delayed gratification known as “the marshmallow test.”
Mischel was born the younger of two brothers. His father was a businessman. Following the Nazi occupation of Vienna (1938), he and his family immigrated to the United States, settling in 1940 in Brooklyn, New York. Mischel’s parents opened a five-and-dime shop, for which he made deliveries while maintaining various part-time jobs. He was valedictorian of his high-school class and received a scholarship to New York University.
Although he initially enrolled in premedical course work, Mischel redirected his focus toward psychology and earned a bachelor’s degree in 1951. Specializing in clinical psychology, he earned a master’s degree from the City College of New York (1953) and a Ph.D. from the Ohio State University (1956). He thereafter held professorships at the University of Colorado (1956–58), Harvard University (1958–62), and Stanford University (1962–82).
In the late 1960s Mischel began a study on delayed gratification—the ability to abstain from instant but less-desirable outcomes in favour of deferred but more-desirable outcomes. The experimenter  seated preschool-age children alone at a table with a desired treat such as a marshmallow and, before exiting the room, presented them with a choice: either (1) to ring a bell to call the researcher back and, upon his return, consume the single marshmallow or (2) to wait until the researcher’s voluntary return and be rewarded with not one but two marshmallows. While some children were unable to wait a full minute (“low delayers”), others were able to wait up to 20 (“high delayers”) by employing various distraction techniques (e.g., covering their eyes with their hands, singing, and turning around in their chairs) to avoid looking at the tempting object.
Upon repeating the test, Mischel advised the children to think of the treats as something inedible (e.g., cotton balls), which dramatically improved impulse control. Follow-up studies, conducted later in life via self-report, further showed that high delayers achieved greater academic success (e.g., higher standardized test scores), better health (e.g., resistance to substance abuse), and more-positive relationships (e.g., lower rates of marital separation and divorce). This breakthrough research demonstrated not only that willpower can be learned but also that it seems to be “a protective buffer against the development of all kinds of vulnerabilities later in life,” as Mischel concluded, thereby implying that self-control is key to both academic and personal success.
In 1983 Mischel became a professor at Columbia University. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1991) and the National Academy of Sciences (2004). Mischel served as editor of the Psychological Review (2000–03) and president of the Association for Psychological Science (2007–08). In 2011 he won the University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award for Psychology for his work on delayed gratification, self-control, and willpower.
