General Electric (GE), in full General Electric Company,  major American corporation and one of the largest and most-diversified corporations in the world. Its products include electrical and electronic equipment, aircraft engines, and financial services. Headquarters are in Boston.
The company was incorporated in 1892, acquiring all the assets of the Edison General Electric Company and two other electrical companies. Edison General had been founded as the Edison Electric Light Company in 1878 by Thomas Alva Edison to market his incandescent lamp and other later products. Edison remained associated with General Electric through his patents and consulting duties.
General Electric established an industrial research laboratory in 1900, and many of its later products were developed by in-house scientists. It produces one of the largest lines of electrical consumer goods in the world and, through its General Electric and Hotpoint appliance brands, became a top seller of various types of home appliances.
In 1986 GE purchased the RCA Corporation (which it had helped to found in 1919), including the RCA-owned television network, the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), Inc. In 1987, however, GE sold RCA’s consumer electronics division to Thomson SA, a state-owned French firm, and purchased Thomson’s medical technology division. In 1989 GE agreed to combine its European business interests in appliances, medical systems, electrical distribution, and power systems with the formerly unrelated British corporation General Electric Company.
While its consumer products are most visible to the general public, they account for a minority of the company’s annual sales. A substantial portion of the company’s sales are to the U.S. Department of Defense. GE’s business groups in the early 21st century were in the areas of commercial finance, consumer finance, infrastructure (including diesel locomotives, jet engines, water treatment systems, and energy delivery systems such as power grids), consumer and industrial technologies (including appliances and lighting products), health care (including diagnostic and imaging products), and media and entertainment through NBCUniversal. In 2011 GE sold a majority stake in NBCUniversal to Comcast, which acquired the remaining shares two years later. In 2016 GE moved its headquarters from Fairfield, Connecticut, to Boston.
