Harold Rosen, in full Harold Allen Rosen,  (born March 20, 1926, New Orleans, Louisiana, U.S.—died January 30, 2017, Pacific Palisades, California), American engineer who designed Syncom 2, the first geosynchronous communications satellite.
Rosen received a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Tulane University in New Orleans in 1947. Beginning in 1948, he worked at Raytheon Manufacturing Company (now Raytheon Company). He received a master’s degree (1948) and a doctorate (1951) in electrical engineering from the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. He began work at Hughes Aircraft Company (later part of Hughes Electronics Corporation) on radar units for aircraft in 1956.
Both Hughes and American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) developed plans for communications satellites shortly after the launch of the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, in 1957. AT&T planned to develop 20–40 satellites that would orbit at low altitudes. However, Rosen favoured a satellite in geostationary orbit, 35,785 km (22,236 miles) above Earth’s Equator, which would have an orbital period equal to that of Earth’s rotation and thus appear stationary in the sky. Only three satellites, spaced 120° apart, would be required for a complete worldwide network with at least one satellite always visible from any point on Earth. In 1959 Rosen, assisted by engineers Donald Williams and Thomas Hudspeth, designed Syncom. To keep the satellite in orbit, Rosen was inspired by the way a football travels in a straight path when spun, and thus Syncom was stabilized by its own spin, which allowed it to dispense with a bulky three-axis stabilization system.
Syncom 1 was lost shortly after launch on February 14, 1963. Syncom 2, the first satellite in a geosynchronous orbit (an orbit that has a period of 24 hours but is inclined to the Equator), was launched successfully on July 26, 1963, and Syncom 3, the first satellite in geostationary orbit, on August 19, 1964. The advantages of a geostationary communications satellite over a low-orbit system such as AT&T’s Telstar, which could be in range of a receiving antenna for only a few minutes, were immediately obvious.
On April 6, 1965, Early Bird (also called Intelsat 1), the first satellite for Intelsat, an international consortium that provided satellite communications, was launched; it was designed and built by Rosen’s team. Early Bird was the first operational commercial satellite providing regular telecommunications and broadcasting services between North America and Europe.
Rosen continued to develop communications satellites for Hughes Aircraft until he retired from the company in 1993 as vice president of engineering for the space and communications group. In 1993 he and his brother Ben, chairman of the computer manufacturer Compaq, founded Rosen Motors, which developed a hybrid automobile that was powered by a flywheel and a gasoline-driven turbine. However, the company failed to interest the automobile industry in the technology and closed in 1997. Rosen and engineer J.B. Straubel cofounded Volacom, Inc., which sought to develop an unmanned aerial vehicle that would be a communications platform. In 2007 he founded the Southern California Selene Group, one of the teams competing for the Google Lunar X Prize to build the first private lunar rover, but the team withdrew in 2008.
Rosen received many honours for his work, including the National Medal of Technology and Innovation (1985) and the National Academy of Engineering’s Charles Stark Draper Prize (1995). In 2003 he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.
