Harry Nyquist,  (born Feb. 7, 1889, Nilsby, Sweden—died April 4, 1976, Harlingen, Texas, U.S.),  American physicist and electrical and communications engineer, a prolific inventor who made fundamental theoretical and practical contributions to telecommunications.
Nyquist moved to the United States in 1907. He earned a B.S. (1914) and an M.S. (1915) in electrical engineering from the University of North Dakota. In 1917, after earning a Ph.D. in physics from Yale University, he joined the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T). There he remained until his retirement in 1954, working in the research department and then (from 1934) at Bell Laboratories. Nyquist continued to serve as a government consultant on military communications well after his retirement.
Some of Nyquist’s best-known work was done in the 1920s and was inspired by telegraph communication problems of the time. Because of the elegance and generality of his writings, much of it continues to be cited and used. In 1924 he published “Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed,” an analysis of the relationship between the speed of a telegraph system and the number of signal values used by the system. His 1928 paper “Certain Topics in Telegraph Transmission Theory” refined his earlier results and established the principles of sampling continuous signals to convert them to digital signals. The Nyquist sampling theorem showed that the sampling rate must be at least twice the highest frequency present in the sample in order to reconstruct the original signal. These two papers by Nyquist, along with one by R.V.L. Hartley, are cited in the first paragraph of Claude Shannon’s classic essay “The Mathematical Theory of Communication” (1948), where their seminal role in the development of information theory is acknowledged.
In 1927 Nyquist provided a mathematical explanation of the unexpectedly strong thermal noise studied by J.B. Johnson. The understanding of noise is of critical importance for communications systems. Thermal noise is sometimes called Johnson noise or Nyquist noise because of their pioneering work in this field.
In 1932 Nyquist discovered how to determine when negative feedback amplifiers are stable. His criterion, generally called the Nyquist stability theorem, is of great practical importance. During World War II it helped control artillery employing electromechanical feedback systems.
In addition to Nyquist’s theoretical work, he was a prolific inventor and is credited with 138 patents relating to telecommunications.
