Robert Kahn, in full Robert Elliot Kahn, byname Bob,  (born December 23, 1938, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.), American electrical engineer, one of the principal architects, with Vinton Cerf, of the Internet. In 2004 both Kahn and Cerf won the A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for their “pioneering work on internetworking, including the design and implementation of the Internet’s basic communications protocols, TCP/IP, and for inspired leadership in networking.”
After receiving an engineering degree from City College of New York in 1960, Kahn received a master’s degree (1962) and a doctorate (1964) in electrical engineering from Princeton University. Immediately after completing his doctorate, Kahn worked for Bell Laboratories and subsequently served as an assistant professor of electrical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) from 1964 to 1966. However, it was his role as a senior scientist at Bolt Beranek & Newman (BB&N), an engineering consulting firm located in Cambridge, Massachusetts, that brought Kahn into contact with the planning for a new kind of computer network, the ARPANET.
ARPANET was named for its sponsor, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA. The network was based on a radically different architecture known as packet switching, in which messages were split into multiple “packets” that traveled independently over many different circuits to their common destination. But the ARPANET was more than a predecessor to the Internet—it was the common technological context in which an entire generation of computer scientists came of age. While at BB&N, Kahn had two major accomplishments. First, he was part of a group that designed the network’s Interface Message Processor, which would mediate between the network and each institution’s host computer. Second, and perhaps more important, in 1972 Kahn helped organize the first International Conference on Computer Communication, which served as the ARPANET’s public debut.
In 1972 Kahn left BB&N for DARPA’s Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO). There he confronted a set of problems related to the deployment of packet switching technology in military radio and satellite communications. However, the real technical problem lay in connecting these disparate military networks—hence the name Internet for a network of networks. As program manager and later director of IPTO, Kahn worked closely with Cerf and others on the development of the Internet’s technical protocol, TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), which separated packet error checking (TCP) from issues related to domains and destinations (IP). The protocol is the basis for the Internet’s open architecture, which permits any computer with the appropriate connection to enter the network. In addition to his work on the Internet, Kahn was the designer of the U.S. military’s Strategic Computing Initiative during the administration of Pres. Ronald Reagan. Kahn also coined the phrase “national information infrastructure” during this period.
Upon leaving IPTO in 1985, Kahn served as president of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives, a not-for-profit group located in Reston, Virginia, and dedicated to the development of network technologies for the public. In 2001 he was among four individuals honoured by the U.S. National Academy of Engineering with the Charles Stark Draper Prize for his role in developing the Internet. Kahn’s other honours included the Presidential Medal of Freedom (2005). In addition, in 2012 he was an inaugural inductee in the Internet Hall of Fame. Kahn is the author of Encyclopædia Britannica’s article Internet.
