Technicolor, formerly (1983–2010) Thomson S.A.,  major French multimedia company and electronics manufacturer.
The original company was formed in 1966 with the merger of Compagnie Française Thomson-Houston and Hotchkiss-Brandt, becoming known as Thomson-Brandt S.A. in 1972. Because its management was long dominated by career military officers, Thomson-Brandt was generally regarded as a technologically competent but commercially conservative electronics firm. It relied heavily on defense contracts. In 1972, for example, its research and development department invented the videodisc system but overlooked its vast commercial potential in the home-video market, selling it instead only as an audio-visual tool in military training. At this time Thomson derived more than half of its sales from its technology subsidiary, Thomson-CSF, which manufactured telephone systems and switching equipment.
With the ascendancy of the Socialist Party in France in 1981, Thomson-Brandt was nationalized in 1982, and the company came under the management of civilian directors sympathetic to the governing Socialist Party. One year later Thomson was reorganized as a holding company, Thomson S.A. In 1987 the firm sold its medical equipment unit to General Electric (GE) and purchased GE’s consumer electronics division, including RCA, thereby strengthening Thomson’s interests in consumer media products, professional media production, and the broadcast and entertainment industries. This led to the formation of Thomson Consumer Electronics in 1988, which became Thomson Multimedia in 1995. Following the trend toward reprivatization in France, Thomson became a publicly traded firm in 1999.
Thomson was an early developer of thin (“flat”) television screens. By the early 21st century Thomson’s Technicolor division had become the world’s largest manufacturer of disc-based media products such as DVDs (digital videodiscs) and CDs (compact discs). The firm was also a leading producer of DVD players, video equipment, and televisions. In 2010 the company changed its name to Technicolor.
