Adso of Montier-en-Der,  (born 910/915, Burgundy—died 992), Benedictine monk and abbot whose treatise on the Antichrist became the standard work on the subject from the mid-10th to the 13th century.
Born of a noble family, Adso was an oblate at the important monastery of Luxeuil, where he also received his education. He was later called to teach at the monastery of St. Èvre in Toul, and in 935 he entered the monastery at Montier-en-Der. In 968, when he became abbot of Montier-en-Der, he began to introduce reforms there in the tradition of the monastery at Gorze. Adso had contacts with the leading religious and political figures of his day, notably Gerberga, the wife of Louis IV of France and sister of Otto I of Germany; Gerbert of Aurillac (the future Pope Sylvester II); and Abbo of Fleury, who asked Adso to compile a verse edition of the second book of the Dialogues, a hagiographic and doctrinal text composed by Pope Gregory I. In 990 Adso became the abbot of the monastery of St. Bénigne in Dijon. His death two years later occurred while he was on pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
Adso was a man of letters as well as a reformer. He was well acquainted with classical literature and collected a significant personal library. Along with his verse edition of the Dialogues, which is now lost, he wrote other works in verse and several poems and hymns. He was also the author of a number of saints’ lives, including the life of Bishop Mansuestus of Toul (485–509). His hagiographic works in particular reveal his devotion to the religious reform current in his day.
Adso’s most important work, however, was the Epistola ad Gerbergam reginam de ortu et tempore Antichristi (“Letter to Queen Gerberga on the Place and Time of Antichrist”), also known as the Libellus de Antichristi (“Little Book on the Antichrist”). Written at Gerberga’s request, possibly because of contemporary fears of the imminence of the Last Days, the treatise was a compilation of the various traditions concerning Antichrist. With a narrative that paralleled contemporary saints’ lives, it represented what may be called an antihagiography, a work that depicts the model life of false sanctity and sin in opposition to the ideal life of a saint.
According to Adso, Antichrist will come but not while the Roman Empire (then governed by the Franks) remains standing. Antichrist will be born in the city of Babylon into the Jewish tribe of Dan, and the devil will imbue him with all iniquity. Eventually he will go to Jerusalem, where he will rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem and assert that he is the son of God, performing miracles and resurrecting the dead. Gaining a large following and the support of many kings and emperors of the world, Antichrist will persecute Christians during a time of tribulation that will last for three and one-half years. In the final battle on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem, Antichrist will be killed by Christ or by the archangel Michael, after which there will be a time of peace and finally the Last Judgment.
Adso’s life of Antichrist was immensely popular during the Middle Ages. The text survives in 9 versions and in some 171 manuscripts. Along with the original Latin version there were numerous translations into the vernaculars, the earliest being an Old English translation completed before the 12th century. Adso’s life also circulated under the names of Alcuin, Augustine, and other important Christian authorities and underwent occasional revision to reflect contemporary events. The work also was the main source for the anonymously composed 12th-century liturgical drama Ludus de Antichristo (“Play of the Antichrist”).
