Agostino Nifo, Latin Augustinus Niphus or Niphus Suessanus, Niphus also spelled Nyphus,  (born c. 1473, Sessa, Kingdom of Naples [Italy]—died  after 1538, possibly Salerno), Renaissance philosopher noted for his development from an anti-Christian interpreter of Aristotelian philosophy into an influential Christian apologist for the immortality of the individual soul.
While attending the University of Padua about 1490, Nifo studied the Averroist Aristotelianism of Nicoletto Vernia and Siger of Brabant. This philosophical school interpreted Aristotle according to the principles of the 12th-century Arab philosopher and physician Averroës and that emphasized the eternity of the world and an immortal, universal intellect subsuming the souls of all individuals at death. Nifo expressed such teaching in his De intellectu et daemonibus (1492; “On the Intellect and Demons”). Later, however, he made a critical edition of Averroës’s commentaries on Aristotle with conclusions more open to Christian doctrine, in the manner of Siger of Brabant.
After succeeding the strict Averroist Pietro Pomponazzi in the chair of philosophy at Padua in 1496, Nifo resigned when Pomponazzi returned. He then assumed teaching posts successively at Naples, Rome, and Salerno. Through the Neoplatonic influence of the Florentine school, he adapted his Aristotelianism to the 13th-century Christian synthesis of St. Thomas Aquinas. Consequently, at the request of Pope Leo X, he wrote Tractatus de immortalitate animae contra Pomponatium (1518; “Treatise on the Immortality of the Soul Against Pomponazzi”) as a refutation of Pomponazzi’s view that the human soul is essentially a material organism dissolving at death. Nifo argued, in a polemic that amounted to a personal attack, that Pomponazzi had neglected to consider the intrinsic relation between the nonmaterial idea and the intellectual power able to communicate it, thus making the soul something more than a bodily organism. The success of this work earned Nifo in 1520 the title of count.
Named as professor at the University of Pisa, Nifo by 1523 had published a plagiarized version of Niccolò Machiavelli’s treatise on the ethics of ruling, Il principe (1513; The Prince), under the title De regnandi peritia (“On Skill in Governing”). This action has prompted some commentators to judge that by this time Nifo had exchanged his intellectual interests for those of a time-serving courtier. Among his other writings are commentaries on the works of Aristotle, 14 vol. (1654); treatises on politics and morality; and a romantic essay, De pulchro et amore (“On Beauty and Love”).
