Al-Suyūṭī, in full Jalāl al-Dīn Abū al-Faḍl ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Abī Bakr al-Suyūṭī,  (born 1445, Cairo, Egypt—died  October 17, 1505, Cairo), Egyptian writer and teacher whose works deal with a wide variety of subjects, the Islamic religious sciences predominating.
The son of a judge, al-Suyūṭī was tutored by a Sufi (Muslim mystic) friend of his father. He was precocious and was already a teacher in 1462. A controversial figure, he was deeply embroiled in the political conflicts and theological disputes of his time, and at one point he proclaimed himself the mujaddid (“renewer”) of the Islamic faith. In 1486 he was appointed head of the Sufi Lodge (Khānaqāh) attached to the mosque of Baybars in Cairo and was living in virtual retirement. When in 1501 he tried to reduce the stipends of Sufi scholars at the mosque, a revolt broke out, and al-Suyūṭī was nearly killed. After his trial, he was placed under house arrest on the island of Rawḍah (near Cairo). He worked there in seclusion until his death.
Al-Suyūṭī’s works number more than 500; many are mere booklets, and others are encyclopaedic. He was coauthor of Tafsīr al-Jalālayn (“Commentary of the Two Jalāls”), a word-by-word commentary on the Qurʾān, the first part of which was written by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Maḥallī. His Itqān fī ʿulūm al-Qurʾān (“Mastery in the Sciences of the Qurʾān”) is a well-known work on Qurʾānic exegesis. Among his works that have been translated into English is Taʾrīkh al-khulafāʾ (History of the Caliphs), as well as a work on cosmology, another on exegesis, and several others.
Al-Suyūṭī was a compiler of genius rather than an original writer, but it is precisely his ability to select and abridge that makes the books useful. This faculty characterizes his most important philological work, Al-Muẓhir fī ʿulūm al-lughah wa anwāʿihā (“The Luminous Work Concerning the Sciences of Language and its Subfields”), a linguistic encyclopaedia covering such topics as the history of the Arabic language, phonetics, semantics, and morphology. It was largely derived from the works of two predecessors, Ibn Jinnī and Ibn Fāris.
