Aleksey II, also spelled Aleksei, Aleksy, or Alexy, original name Aleksey Mikhailovich Ridiger, Ridiger also spelled Rüdiger,  (born Feb. 23, 1929, Tallinn, Est.—died Dec. 5, 2008, Peredelkino, Russia), Russian Orthodox Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia from 1990 to 2008.
Ridiger graduated from Leningrad Theological Academy in 1953 and was consecrated an archbishop in the Russian Orthodox Church in 1964. From 1968 to 1986 he was metropolitan of Tallinn and Estonia; in July 1986 he became metropolitan of Leningrad (St. Petersburg) and Novgorod. He was a permanent member of the Holy Synod, the church’s organizing body, and administrator of affairs for the Moscow patriarchate before succeeding Patriarch Pimen on June 7, 1990. Aleksey II was the first patriarch in the history of the Soviet Union to be chosen without government pressure; candidates were nominated from the floor, and the election was conducted by secret ballot.
He quickly became an outspoken advocate of the rights of the church, asking the Soviet government to allow the option of religious education in the state schools and urging it to pass a “freedom of conscience” law legalizing religious worship. He was among the dignitaries present for the investiture of Boris Yeltsin as president of the Russian republic in July 1991, and during the abortive coup in August 1991, at Yeltsin’s request, he denounced the detention of Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev and anathematized all those involved.
Aleksey strove to restore the Russian Orthodox Church to the prominence it had enjoyed before the Soviet Union repressed religious expression. To this end he combatted proselytizing efforts within Russia by other Christian churches, and he supported a national law, which passed in 1997, placing restrictions on religions that did not have “historic” ties to the country (i.e., religions other than Orthodox Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Buddhism). He also contested the autocephalous status of Orthodox churches in the Ukraine, insisting on the primacy of the Moscow Patriarchate. Yet, despite his championing of Russian Orthodoxy, he also issued statements condemning anti-Semitism and refusing to identify the church with Russian nationalism. In 2007 he resumed and strengthened ties with the metropolitan of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia, an American church that separated from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1927.
