Aleph, formerly (1987–2000) AUM Shinrikyo,  Japanese new religious movement founded in 1987 as AUM Shinrikyo (“AUM Supreme Truth”) by Matsumoto Chizuo, known to his followers as Master Asahara Shoko. The organization came to public attention when it was learned that several of its top leaders had perpetrated the Tokyo subway attack of 1995, in which 13 people died and thousands more were injured following the release of nerve gas into the city’s subway system. This action brought infamy and disarray to the group.
AUM emerged out of Asahara’s dissatisfaction with traditional Japanese Buddhism. Having found Tibetan and Theravada Buddhist teachings more appealing than the dominant forms of Japanese Buddhism, Asahara attempted to create a Buddhism that emphasized non-Japanese themes. He espoused a spiritual path whose goal was the attainment of enlightenment in this life. It incorporated a variety of techniques, from yoga and meditation to psychic-development exercises, to assist the followers’ growth toward enlightenment. Progress was marked by three levels of initiation, and after attaining the third level members could be admitted into the group’s monastic community. Followers, who included many well-educated people, were taught to give total devotion to their guru. Asahara also became interested in prophecy, studied the Christian Book of Revelation, and in the early 1990s predicted an array of disasters for Japan, including World War III. Because Asahara expected AUM to replace the Japanese government in the chaos following the war, its organization mirrored that of the government.
At the time of the gassing incident, March 20, 1995, AUM claimed some 50,000 members, the majority of whom lived in Russia. However, the arrest of Asahara and several hundred members of the leadership and rank and file and the conviction of some 200 of those arrested for both the subway attack and numerous other violent acts (including a gas attack in Matsumoto, Japan, in 1994) decimated the group, and the Japanese government seized its property. Although a contingent of the group remained in Japan, foreign affiliates dissolved in the wake of the gassing. In early 2000 AUM’s new leaders admitted Asahara’s role in a series of crimes (including the two gas attacks), distanced themselves from his spiritual leadership, set up a program to pay compensation to the victims’ families, and changed the organization’s name to Aleph. The group had more than 1,500 members in the early 21st century, but in 2007 Asahara’s successor, Jōyū Fumihiro, left Aleph with a number of members and formed a new organization, Hikari no Wa (“Ring of Light”).
