Ancient Iranian religion,  diverse beliefs and practices of the culturally and linguistically related group of ancient peoples who inhabited the Iranian plateau and its borderlands, as well as areas of Central Asia from the Black Sea to Khotan (modern Hotan, China).
The northern Iranians (referred to generally as Scythians [Saka] in Classical sources), who occupied the steppes, differed significantly from the southern Iranians. In religion and culture, both the northern and southern Iranians had much in common with the ancient Indo-Aryan-speaking peoples of the Indian subcontinent, although there was much borrowing from Mesopotamia as well, especially in western Iran. From at least the time of the rise of the Median empire, Iranian religion and culture has had a profound influence upon the Middle East, as also the Middle East upon Iran.
This account will take the conquest of the Achaemenian dynasty by Alexander the Great as a somewhat arbitrary date for the close of the period of ancient Iranian religion, even though these influences have continued through later history and some forms of Iranian religion have persisted to the present day. It will also treat ancient Iranian religion, insofar as possible, apart from Zoroastrianism. Unless otherwise indicated, all spellings of Iranian names and terms are given in reconstructed forms that often differ from the Avestan spellings of the Zoroastrian canon.
Modern understanding of ancient Iranian religion is impeded by the limitations of the available sources, which are inevitably of two sorts: textual and material.
Textual sources are both indigenous and foreign, the latter being primarily Greek, although for purposes of historical reconstruction the ancient Indian Vedic literature is indispensable. The main problem with the Greek sources, the most important of which is Herodotus, is that the information they contain is not always very reliable, either because it is outright erroneous or because it is based on misunderstandings. The main indigenous sources are the Achaemenian royal inscriptions in the Old Persian language (with Akkadian, Elamite, and Aramaic translations) and the Avesta, the Zoroastrian sacred scriptures, in a language called Avestan. The royal inscriptions, especially those of Darius (522–486 bce) and his son Xerxes I (486–465 bce), for the most part eloquent pieces of propaganda, are rich in references to religion. In addition to the information they contain, they have the great advantage of being fixed in time and place. Matters are quite otherwise in the case of the Avesta, which is the principal source of knowledge of ancient Iranian religions.
Like the Bible, the Avesta is a collection of a variety of texts composed over what appears to be a considerable span of time by different authors, which has endured editing and redaction at several points during the history of its development. The text that is now extant represents only a fragment of what remained in the 9th century of the late Sāsānian Avesta compiled under the direction of Khosrow I (531–579 ce). Summaries of the contents of the Sāsānian Avesta show that it was an enormous collection containing texts in Avestan as well as in—and predominantly so—Pahlavi, the language of Sāsānian Zoroastrianism. In spite of the relatively recent date of the existing Avesta, it contains matter of great antiquity, of which the Gāthās (“Songs”) of the Prophet Zarathustra (also known by his Greek name, Zoroaster) and much of the Yashts are among the oldest. The Gāthās contain expressions of Zarathustra’s religious vision which, in many ways, is a complicated reinterpretation of inherited Iranian religious ideas. The Yashts are collections of verses dedicated to the various deities. Most of the Yashts, though touched up with Zoroastrian terminology and ideas, have little to do with anything specifically Zoroastrian. The gods invoked are essentially the gods of pre-Zoroastrian Iran. Unfortunately, there is little agreement as to when Zarathustra lived, though most scholars agree that he lived sometime between about 1200 and 600 bce. It does not seem possible to date the Yashts much more precisely, except to believe that their redaction (not necessarily composition) may have first taken place in the 5th century bce.
The earliest religious texts of the closely related Indo-Aryan speakers (principally the Rigveda) are indispensable for making historical reconstructions of the development of Iranian religion. The Rigveda, a collection of more than 1,000 hymns to various deities, can be dated to a period from approximately 1300 to 900 bce. Apart from the Achaemenian inscriptions, there is no secure evidence that religious compositions were reduced to writing until the late Arsacid or early Sāsānian periods. Thus, unlike the other religions of the Middle East, the Iranian religions had no written texts in the ancient period. All religious “literature” was oral, in both composition and transmission.
Material sources are much more limited and are, for the most part, restricted to western Iran. The remains of Achaemenian architecture and art, by far the most important of the material sources, provide abundant evidence of imperial articulation of religious symbols and show a thorough dependence on Middle Eastern precedents.
