André-Hercule de Fleury,   (born June 22, 1653, Lodève, Fr.—died  Jan. 29, 1743, Paris), French cardinal and chief minister who controlled the government of King Louis XV from 1726 to 1743.
The son of a collector of ecclesiastical revenue, Fleury became a priest and eventually almoner to the King in 1683 and bishop of Fréjus in 1698. Shortly before his death in September 1715, Louis XIV appointed Fleury tutor to his five-year-old great-grandson and heir, who succeeded to the throne as Louis XV. In June 1726 Louis XV appointed Fleury minister of state and had him created a cardinal in order to give him precedence in the royal council. Fleury never assumed the title premier ministre (“first minister”), but he was in fact the chief minister of the realm. Ruling with an iron hand, he authorized continuation of the codification of civil law that had begun under Louis XIV and the institution of fiscal reforms that enabled French finances to recover from the costly wars of Louis XIV.
Fleury’s major achievements were in foreign policy. He at first formed a close working relationship with the British prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole, and strove to reduce the tensions that were mounting between Great Britain and Spain. As a result of his efforts, the hostilities that broke out between Spain and Great Britain in 1727 were prevented from developing into a European conflict. Nevertheless, after 1731 Fleury sought to undermine British influence on the Continent and to reconcile France with Austria. His plans were temporarily upset in 1733, when Russia, Austria’s ally, forcibly prevented Louis XV’s father-in-law, Stanisław Leszczyński, from claiming the Polish throne. The war party compelled Fleury to support Leszczyński in the ensuing War of the Polish Succession (1733–38) against Austria and Russia. Though French forces occupied Lorraine, Fleury limited the scope of the conflict by securing British neutrality and restricting French military operations in Germany and Italy. In 1738 Fleury concluded a peace treaty by which Leszczyński renounced his claims to the Polish throne and accepted instead the crown of Lorraine. (In accordance with this agreement, Lorraine was annexed by France upon Leszczyński’s death in 1766.) Fleury’s diplomatic maneuvers had secured closer relations between France and Austria and had broken British dominance in the affairs of the Continent.
Nevertheless, in 1740 the stability of Austria—and the peace of Europe—was threatened by the death of the Holy Roman emperor Charles VI. Fleury recognized the succession of Charles’s daughter, Maria Theresa, to the Austrian dominions but sought to secure the election of a French client, Charles Albert, elector of Bavaria (Holy Roman emperor 1742–45), to the imperial throne. The cardinal was, however, too old and feeble to wage a vigorous struggle against the war party, which had fallen under the control of Marshal Charles-Louis de Belle-Isle. Overruling Fleury, Belle-Isle forged an alliance with Prussia in 1741 and entered the war against Austria (War of the Austrian Succession, 1740–48). By the time that Fleury died in early 1743 it was evident that France could gain little from the conflict.
