Angela Warnick Buchdahl, née Angela Lee Warnick,  (born July 8, 1972, Seoul, South Korea), South Korean-born American rabbi who was the first Asian American to lead a major U.S. synagogue (2014– ) and to be ordained as a cantor (1999) and as a rabbi (2001).
When Warnick was five years old, she moved with her family from Seoul to Tacoma, Washington, where her father, an American Reform Jew, and her mother, a Korean Buddhist, raised her in the Jewish faith. Musically gifted, she not only sang but also learned to play several instruments, including piano and flute, and at age 14 she became the music teacher at her local synagogue. She attended Reform movement summer camps and, after spending time in Israel on a youth fellowship at age 16, resolved to become a rabbi. She earned (1994) a B.A. in religious studies from Yale University, where she met her future husband, Jacob Buchdahl, who became an attorney.
Buchdahl completed her rabbinical and cantorial studies at Hebrew Union College–Jewish Institute of Religion, New York City. She was invested as a cantor in 1999 and ordained a rabbi in 2001, becoming the first woman to hold both posts. She then served as an associate rabbi and cantor at Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale, New York. In addition to performing her official duties, she began to write articles and speak publicly about her experiences as an Asian American Jew and her challenge of coming to terms with her mixed heritage. Buchdahl later served on the board of directors of the Jewish Multiracial Network, an organization dedicated to advancing Jewish diversity.
In 2006 Buchdahl was appointed senior cantor at Central Synagogue, the oldest synagogue in continuous use in New York City and—with some 6,500 members—one of the largest Reform synagogues in North America. Her passionate musical performances were credited with helping the synagogue double its Friday night attendance and boost its overall membership; some services that were streamed live online attracted more than 20,000 viewers from around the world. Buchdahl also helped lead several of Central Synagogue’s community organizing initiatives and social justice projects. In addition, she was a featured singer in 18 Voices Sing Kol Nidre (2010), a documentary film that traced the history of the Kol Nidre prayer, traditionally sung in Jewish synagogues at the beginning of the service on the eve of Yom Kippur. On July 1, 2014, Buchdahl formally became senior rabbi of Central Syagogue, succeeding Peter Rubinstein.
