Anglican Church of Canada,  self-governing Anglican church and member of the Anglican Communion. It dates from the Church of England congregations established in Canada during the 18th century. In 1750 Canada’s first Anglican church was built in Halifax, N.S. Additional congregations were formed as settlers arrived from England and as many American colonists who remained loyal to England resettled in Canada during and after the American Revolution.
Charles Inglis (1734–1816), rector of Trinity Church in New York City and a loyalist who returned to England in 1783, was consecrated bishop of Nova Scotia in 1787, the first bishop consecrated for work outside the British Isles. Under his leadership more than 20 churches were built, and an academy and a college were founded.
The Anglican Church gradually spread throughout Canada, and until 1832 it was the established church of Canada. As congregations increased, they were grouped into dioceses and provinces. A unifying organization, the General Synod, was established in 1893 in Toronto for the two provinces and 15 dioceses then in existence.
A revised Book of Common Prayer (1962) and The Book of Alternative Services (1985) are used by the church for its liturgy. Its doctrinal statements are the Apostles’ and Nicene creeds and the Thirty-nine Articles.
Beginning in the 1980s the Anglican Church in Canada confronted the legacy of boarding schools it had run until 1969 to promote the systematic assimilation of First Nations and Inuit children into predominantly white Canadian society. Many former students of the schools filed federal suit against the church for physical and sexual abuse and loss of connection to their cultural roots. In 1993 the church issued a formal apology, and in 2003 it agreed to pay $24 million (Canadian) to some 80,000 former students (the amount of the settlement was later reduced). In 2006 the church created the office of the National Indigenous Anglican Bishop, with jurisdiction over all First Nation and Inuit Anglican communities in Canada.
The issue of same-sex unions has caused tension within the church since 2002, when one diocese authorized their blessing. After church bishops narrowly defeated a 2007 measure that would have allowed individual dioceses to decide whether to bless same-sex unions, three Canadian dioceses voted to accept them. In 2008 a small number of churches voted to secede from the church over the issue. Later that year, delegates from these churches met in Wheaton, Ill., with those from American churches who had seceded from the Episcopal Church in the United States of America (ECUSA; the U.S. province of the Anglican Communion) to discuss forming a separate Anglican church in North America. In June 2009 these delegates met again in Belford, Texas, to form the Anglican Church in North America (ACNA), which claimed about 100,000 members and 700 parishes in 28 dioceses in the United States and Canada.
The Anglican Church of Canada comprises 30 dioceses, each headed by a bishop. In addition, two bishops hold jurisdictions that transcend the boundaries of any particular diocese: the Bishop Ordinary to the Armed Forces and the National Indigenous Anglican Bishop. The dioceses are combined into four ecclesiastical provinces, each headed by an archbishop. The dioceses and provinces hold synods to conduct the business of the church in their areas. The General Synod serves as the governing body of the church and meets triennially. The church is headed by the primate, who presides over the General Synod.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the church claimed about 680,000 members and roughly 2,900 churches. Headquarters are in Toronto.
