Ann Lee, byname Mother Ann,  (born Feb. 29, 1736, Manchester, Eng.—died Sept. 8, 1784, Watervliet, N.Y., U.S.), religious leader who brought the Shaker sect from England to the American Colonies.
Lee was the unlettered daughter of a blacksmith who was probably named Lees. In her youth she went to work in a textile mill. At the age of 22 she joined a sect known as the Shaking Quakers, or Shakers, because of the shaking and dancing that characterized their worship. She married in 1762, a union that tradition holds was unhappy and may have influenced her later doctrinal insistence on celibacy.
In 1770, during a period of religious persecution by the English authorities, Lee was imprisoned and while in jail became convinced of the truth of certain religious ideas perceived in a vision. She came to believe that sexual lust impeded Christ’s work and that only through celibacy could men and women further his kingdom on Earth. Four years later, commanded as the result of another vision, Lee persuaded her husband, brother, and six other followers to immigrate to America. There, her followers founded a settlement in the woods of Niskeyuna (now Watervliet), near Albany (in present-day New York state). Beginning with an influx of converts from nearby settlements, the Shaker movement grew and began to spread throughout New England to embrace thousands. Mother Ann, as she came to be known, was believed to have ushered in the millennium, for the Shakers asserted that as Christ had embodied the masculine half of God’s dual nature, so she embodied the female half.
In 1780 Mother Ann was imprisoned for treason because of her pacifist doctrines and her refusal to sign an oath of allegiance. She was soon released and in 1781–83 toured New England. According to witnesses, she performed a number of miracles, including healing the sick by touch. After her death in 1784, her followers organized the United Society of Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, which was also known as the Millennial Church and, most commonly, as the Shakers, and which by 1826 had grown to encompass 18 Shaker villages in 8 states. The Shakers gradually disappeared as an active religious sect.
