Antoine Arnauld, byname The Great Arnauld,  (born Feb. 6, 1612—died  Aug. 8, 1694, Brussels, Spanish Netherlands [now in Belgium]), leading 17th-century theologian of Jansenism, a Roman Catholic movement that held heretical doctrines on the nature of free will and predestination.
Arnauld was the youngest of the 10 surviving children of Antoine Arnauld, a Parisian lawyer, and Catherine Marion de Druy (see Arnauld family). He studied theology at the Sorbonne and, in 1641, was ordained into the Roman Catholic priesthood. Under the influence of the abbot of Saint-Cyran—a founder of Jansenism and spiritual adviser to several members of the Arnauld family—he published his treatise De la fréquente communion (1643; “On Frequent Communion”), defending controversial Jansenist views on the Eucharist and on penance. With his Théologie morale des Jésuites (1643; “Moral Theology of the Jesuits”), Arnauld launched his long polemical campaign against the Jesuits, in which Pierre Nicole, a young theologian from Chartres, was to be his collaborator. In 1655 Arnauld wrote two pamphlets in which he affirmed the substantial orthodoxy of Cornelius Otto Jansen (the Belgian theologian who initiated the movement). These works sparked a dispute that resulted in Arnauld’s expulsion from the Sorbonne in 1656. It was this controversy that provoked the French philosopher Blaise Pascal to write his defense of Arnauld in the series of letters known as Les Provinciales (1656–57). During the period of the great persecution of the Jansenists (1661–69), Arnauld emerged as a leader of the resistance.
The so-called Peace of Clement IX (1669) brought Arnauld some years of tranquillity, beginning with the gracious reception accorded to him by King Louis XIV, and he next turned to writing against the Calvinists and on subjects disputed between Protestants and Roman Catholics. He then won such fame as a theologian that Pope Innocent XI is said to have considered making him a cardinal.
In 1679, the persecution of Jansenists was renewed and Arnauld sought refuge first in the Netherlands and then in Belgium. He settled permanently in Brussels in 1682, where he was to remain in voluntary exile until his death. Despite the precarious conditions in which he had to work, the amount of Arnauld’s writing during his exile was enormous. He not only resumed his attack on the Jesuit casuists in the last six volumes of his Morale pratique des Jésuistes (1689–94; the first two had appeared in 1669 and 1682) but also intervened in the dispute over the rights of the French monarch in the Gallican church. The major written works of Arnauld’s later years were generated by his disagreements with the French philosopher and theologian Nicolas Malebranche and with Pierre Nicole, his ally in the earlier anti-Jesuit polemics.
