Arabian religion,  beliefs of Arabia comprising the polytheistic beliefs and practices that existed before the rise of Islam in the 7th century ce. Arabia is here understood in the broad sense of the term to include the confines of the Syrian desert. The religion of Palmyra, which belongs to the Aramaic sphere, is excluded from this account. The monotheistic religions that had already spread in Arabia before the arrival of Islam are also mentioned briefly. For historical background, see Arabia, history of: History and cultural development: Pre-Islamic Arabia, to the 7th century ce.
In the polytheistic religions of Arabia most of the gods were originally associated with heavenly bodies, to which were ascribed powers of fecundity, protection, or revenge against enemies. Aside from a few deities common to various populations, the pantheons show a marked local particularism. But many religious practices were in general use. The study of these practices is instructive in view of their similarities with those of the biblical world and also with those of the world of Islam, for, while firmly repudiating the idolatry of the pre-Islamic period, which it calls the “Age of Ignorance” (Jāhiliyyah), Islam has nevertheless taken over, in a refined form, some of its practices.
Knowledge of pre-Islamic Arabia rests mainly on original archaeological and epigraphic data from the region itself. Countless pre-Islamic sites are scattered over the whole Arabian Peninsula: ancient lines of circles of raised stones, cairns, graveyards, and so on. In addition there are more recent constructions such as fortified towns and ruins of temples and irrigation systems. Many rock faces are covered with incised drawings. The oldest drawings, barely visible under a dark patina, date back to several millennia bce and provide evidence, for instance, of an ancient cult for the bull and the ostrich. These ancient drawings also depict peculiar ritual scenes that refer to a still obscure mythology. More explicit and much later (at least no earlier than the end of the 2nd millennium bce) are tens of thousands of alphabetic rock graffiti in ancient Arabian dialects, written in related local South Semitic alphabets. These graffiti were clustered predominantly along the natural routes followed by nomads and caravaneers, as well as less numerous monumental inscriptions from the sites formerly occupied by a sedentary population.
The written graffiti are short inscriptions scratched on the rock. The author gives his name and his patronymic and/or his tribal affiliation and genealogy. Short messages, such as a description of an incident, a sad evocation of a dead relative, or an invocation to a god, may follow. Thanks to their considerable number, such texts, which may be rather insignificant in themselves, provide valuable information on the gods and their attributes and on their worshipers.
The monumental inscriptions are much more elaborate and meaningful, both because they belong to the complex institutions of a sedentary culture and because they appear in an archaeological context. They are carefully engraved, so that the state of evolution of the script allows them to be dated approximately, even when no explicit date is given. They are utilitarian in character and are usually concerned with the construction of buildings, the dedication of objects to a god, or arrangements relating to irrigation. They may also describe military campaigns. So far only traces of a true religious literature have been recovered. But several specimens of a hitherto unknown type of document, excavated since 1970 in Yemen, contradict the unilateral character of the inscriptions. These are records from private archives (personal letters, contracts, and so on), finely engraved in a cursive writing on small wooden sticks. Iconographic documents such as statues and reliefs, seals, and coins also reveal aspects of the religion.
Yet another source is the Muslim tradition. Next to the pre-Islamic poetry, belatedly put into writing, it comprises the Qurʾān, the sacred book of the Muslims transmitted by its Prophet Muhammad, which takes a stand against idolatry. Historical traditions have been transmitted by early Muslim annalists and geographers; more specific data on the ancient folklore and religion appear, for instance, in “The Book of the Idols” (Kitāb al-aṣnām), by the Iraqi genealogist Ibn al-Kalbī (8th–9th century ce), and in “The Crown” (al-Iklīl), by the Yemeni encyclopaedist and geographer al-Hamdānī (9th–10th century ce), which describes the pre-Islamic antiquities of Yemen.
External sources are scanty: Arabia has remained little known to its neighbours. From the 9th to the 7th century bce Assyrian kings report their campaigns against North Arabian kings (or queens) and tribes and occasionally name their gods. The annals of Sargon for the year 718 bce and those of his son Sennacherib name two successive sovereigns of Sabaʾ who sent them a “tribute” of aromatics. The Book of Kings of the Bible describes the legendary visit in Jerusalem of a queen of Sheba, bringing presents of gold and frankincense, during the reign of Solomon (10th century bce). In the middle of the 6th century bce the Neo-Babylonian king Nabu-naʾid (Nabonidus) conquered the oasis of Taymāʾ in the Hejaz (al-Ḥijāz). He boasts of having settled populations from Babylonia there and in neighbouring oases such as Dedān, Khaybar, and Yathrib (Medina), which are known to have been inhabited since ancient times by Jewish populations. It is quite probable that Jews of the Babylonian Exile were among those forced settlers and initiated at that time the Jewish presence in Arabia.
Some classical authors, from Herodotus (5th century bce) to Claudius Ptolemy (2nd century ce), provide information on the religion of the Arabs and on the geography of the Arabian Peninsula. Several Byzantine authors report conflicts between Jews and Christians in Yemen in the 6th century ce.
For many subsequent centuries Arabia remained practically closed to European penetration. Important discoveries of monuments and inscriptions occurred only from about the middle of the 19th century. It was only after World War II, and indeed mostly since the late 1970s, that major archaeological surveys and excavations began in various parts of the peninsula.
