Armenian Apostolic Church,  independent Oriental Orthodox Christian church and the national church of Armenia.
According to tradition, Armenia was evangelized by the apostles Bartholomew and Thaddeus. Armenia became the first country to adopt Christianity about 300 ce, when St. Gregory the Illuminator converted the Arsacid king Tiridates III. The new Armenian church soon struck a course independent of the founding church at Caesarea Cappadociae (now Kayseri, Turkey), though it developed in close relationship with the Syrians, who provided it with scriptures and liturgy and much of its basic institutional terminology. The Armenian church’s dependence on the Syriac alphabet ended in the 5th century, when Mesrop Mashtots invented an Armenian alphabet and undertook numerous translations of the scriptures into Armenian.
In 506 at the Council of Dvin, the Armenian church rejected the ruling of the Council of Chalcedon (451) that the one person of Jesus Christ consists of two natures, one divine and one human. The Armenian church was one of several Eastern churches that confessed the Christological formula of St. Cyril of Alexandria, which proclaimed “one incarnate nature of the Word.” After Chalcedon, the Armenian church was considered by the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches to be monophysite—i.e., taking the theological view that Christ had only one, divine nature (physis), despite his incarnation in a human body. But like the other “pre-Chalcedon” or Oriental Orthodox churches—churches in the Caucasus, the Middle East, and Asia that did not offer allegiance to Rome or to Constantinople—the Armenian Apostolic Church in fact rejected monophysitism and promoted a doctrinal position known as miaphysitism, which holds that both divinity and humanity are equally present within a single (hence the Greek prefix mia-) nature in the person of Christ. When the Georgian church broke away from the Armenians and reunited with Eastern Orthodoxy in the early 7th century, the Armenians remained in communion with the other Oriental Orthodox churches.
Gregory the Illuminator, the first head of the Armenian church, and his early successors had their residence at Ejmiadzin. It was moved to Dvin from 485 to 927 and then was located variously until 1293, when the catholicosate (the church’s highest ecclesiastical administrative office) was transferred to the Cilician capital, Sis (now Kozan, Turkey), where it remained after the fall of Cilicia to the Muslim Mamlūks of Egypt. In the 15th century Gregory IX Musabegian rejected efforts to transfer the see (ecclesiastical jurisdiction) to eastern Armenia in order to withdraw it from Roman influence. A synod of 17 bishops deposed him, and the monk Kirakos was elected catholicos at Ejmiadzin in 1441, the first in a long line of prelates bearing the title “Catholicos of All Armenians.”
The Armenian Apostolic Church comprises four sees. Two are catholicosates, at Ejmiadzin and Cilicia (now based in Antelias, Lebanon). There are also two patriarchates, at Constantinople (now Istanbul, Turkey) and Jerusalem, respectively. The catholicos of Ejmiadzin is generally recognized as the head of the whole church and bears the title “Supreme Patriarch and Catholicos of All Armenians.” The catholicos at Cilicia, who bears the title “Catholicos of the Great House of Cilicia,” owes the catholicos of Ejmiadzin spiritual allegiance but retains administrative autonomy. Relationships between the catholicoses have on occasion been strained by political tensions. Whereas the supreme catholicos resides in Armenia, Armenian nationalists (Dashnaks) tend to support the see of Cilicia. This division is reflected among North American Armenians.
The patriarchates of Constantinople and Jerusalem are of relatively recent origin and recognize the supremacy of Ejmiadzin. The patriarchate of Jerusalem was founded early in the 14th century when the monastery of St. James in Jerusalem proclaimed its bishop Sargis an independent patriarch. The patriarchate of Constantinople was created in 1461 by the Ottoman sultan Mehmed II, who appointed a local bishop to be the religious leader of the entire Armenian community in the Ottoman Empire. Because the territory involved included the majority of Armenians, the patriarch of Constantinople, while owing spiritual allegiance to Ejmiadzin, was effectively the most powerful prelate in the Armenian church until the end of the Ottoman Empire after World War I.
The Armenian Apostolic Church is seen by many as the custodian of Armenian national identity. It is a member of the World Council of Churches and has participated in ecumenical endeavours. Alongside other Oriental Orthodox churches, it  participated since the late 20th century in dialogues with both the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches in efforts to resolve doctrinal disputes dating back to the Council of Chalcedon. Many of these issues have been resolved.
