Arsenius the Great, also called Arsenius of Rome,  (born c. 354, Rome—died c. 455, Troe, Scete Desert, Egypt; feast day July 19), Roman noble, later monk of Egypt, whose asceticism among the Christian hermits in the Libyan Desert caused him to be ranked among the celebrated Desert Fathers and influenced the development of the monastic and contemplative life in Eastern and Western Christendom. Arsenius is honoured as a saint by the Greek Orthodox Church and the Syro-Maronites (an Eastern Syriac church in union with Rome). His feast day is July 19.
Born of a Roman senatorial family, Arsenius probably was made a deacon by Pope Damasus. Recommended by Damasus about 383, he was called to the court of Emperor Theodosius I the Great (ruled 379–395) in Constantinople and entrusted with the education of Theodosius’s sons Arcadius and Honorius. After 11 years of tutoring, Arsenius retired to the eremitical life on Mount Scete in the Libyan Desert. Shortly afterward, he was forced to flee to Troe, near ancient Memphis, Egypt, in order to escape the devastating incursions of the Libyan Mazici tribesmen, whom he likened to the Goths and Huns who ravaged Rome. Following an odyssey of approximately 15 years throughout the Egyptian wilderness, he died in the desert of Scete. He was reputed to have lived for more than 100 years. His tall, lean appearance, as described by his biographer and monastic disciple, Daniel, reinforced his fame as an ascetic.
Byzantine historians and monastic writers attribute various maxims and conferences to Arsenius, many of which are contained in the 5th-century anthology Apophthegmata patrum (“Sayings of the Fathers”). His principal works included the Didaskalia kai parainesis (“Instruction and Exhortation”), which was written as a guideline for monks and is evidence, according to 6th-century historians, that he was an abbot or spiritual leader of a religious community. His commentary on the Gospel According to Luke, Eis ton peirastēn nomikon (“On the Temptation of the Law”), in effect is also a treatise on asceticism and the contemplative life. These texts are contained in the series Patrologia Graeca, vol. 65–66 (1857–66), edited by J.-P. Migne.
