Assemblies of God,  Pentecostal denomination of the Protestant church, generally considered the largest such denomination in the United States. It was formed by a union of several small Pentecostal groups at Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1914. The council of some 120 pastors and evangelists who effected this union among diverse regional associations adopted a simple type of polity that was an admixture of Congregational and Presbyterian elements. The council elected an Executive Presbytery to serve as the central administrative group; this organ was empowered to execute the mandates given it by the General Council and to act for the council in all matters that affected its interest when it was not in session.
Except for a pronouncement that “the Holy inspired Scriptures are the all-sufficient rule for faith and practice…and we shall not add to or take from them,” that first General Council postponed action on the matter of a definitive doctrinal statement. Subsequently, however, a Statement of Fundamental Truths was adopted. The document demonstrated that the Assemblies of God are Trinitarian (believing in God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) and Arminian (accepting the doctrines of grace and free will as espoused by the 16th–17th-century Dutch theologian Arminius). They also subscribe to two ordinances (baptism by total immersion in water and the Lord’s Supper), hold a view of sanctification (becoming holy) that may be described as “progressive,” or gradual rather than “instantaneous” in regard to moral purity, and are strongly premillennial, believing in the doctrine of Christ’s Second Advent before the 1,000-year reign of Christ and his saints.
From the outset, the Assemblies of God has been intensely mission-conscious. In addition to extensive foreign missions, the denomination conducts a diversified program of home missions among foreign-language groups in America’s urban centres, on Indian reservations, in prisons, and among the deaf and the blind. The denomination operates the Gospel Publishing House in Springfield, Missouri, two colleges of arts and science—Evangel University (also in Springfield) and Vanguard University of Southern California (Costa Mesa)—and a number of regional Bible institutes.
In 1997 the group reported 2,494,574 members and 11,920 congregations in the United States. The related Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada reported 218,782 members and 1,100 congregations. U.S. headquarters are in Springfield, Missouri, and Canadian headquarters are in Mississauga, Ontario.
