atonement,  the process by which people remove obstacles to their reconciliation with God. It is a recurring theme in the history of religion and theology. Rituals of expiation and satisfaction appear in most religions as the means by which religious people reestablish or strengthen their relation to the holy or divine. Atonement is often attached to sacrifice, both of which often connect ritual cleanness with moral purity and religious acceptability.
The term atonement developed in the English language in the 16th century by the combination of “at onement,” meaning to “set at one” or “to reconcile.” It was used in the various English translations of the Bible, including the King James Version (1611), to convey the idea of reconciliation and expiation, and it has been a favourite way for Christians to speak about the saving significance attributed to the death of Jesus Christ on the cross. Various theories of the meaning of the Atonement of Christ have arisen: satisfaction for the sins of the world; redemption from the Devil or from the wrath of God; a saving example of true, suffering love; the prime illustration of divine mercy; and a divine victory over the forces of evil. In Christian orthodoxy there is no remission of sin without “the shedding of [Christ’s] blood” (Hebrews 9:26).
In his epochal work Cur Deus homo? (“Why Did God Become Man?”), St. Anselm of Canterbury (1033/34–1109) formulated the most trenchant theory of the Atonement of Christ, which is also referred to as the “satisfaction theory of redemption.” Anselm held that Jesus’ death on the cross was absolutely necessary because there was no other rationally intelligible way in which sinful humankind could have been reconciled with God. If God in his mercy had simply forgiven humans for their sin, God’s moral order would have been repudiated. God’s righteousness, offended by human sin, demanded satisfaction: that satisfaction could be rendered only by someone who was both God—because God could overcome sin by sinlessness—and human—because humans were those who were guilty of sin. Anselm’s theory was also significant for presenting a comprehensive system that focused on the interrelationship between God, Jesus, and humankind. With some relatively minor alterations, Anselm’s doctrine of the Atonement passed over into the theology of the Latin church, forming the basis of both Roman Catholic and orthodox Protestant ideas of the work of Christ.
In Judaism, vicarious atonement has little importance. For traditional Jews, atonement is expiation for an individual’s own sin in order to attain God’s forgiveness. Individuals may achieve this in various ways, including repentance, payment for a wrong action, good works, suffering, and prayer. Repentance and changed conduct are usually stressed as the most important aspects of atonement. The 10 “days of awe,” culminating in the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur), are centred on repentance.
