Benedict (XIII), original name Pedro de Luna,  (born c. 1328, Illueca, Kingdom of Aragon—died 1423, Peñíscola, in Valencia), antipope from 1394 to 1417. He reigned in Avignon, Provence, in opposition to the reigning popes in Rome, during the Western Schism (1378–1417), when the Roman Catholic Church was split by national rivalries claiming the papal throne.
Of noble birth, he was professor of canon law at Montpellier University in southern France before he was made cardinal in 1375. The Schism began in 1378 with the election of Robert of Geneva as Clement VII in opposition to Pope Urban VI. Benedict gave his allegiance to Clement and, upon Clement’s death, was elected to succeed him by the cardinals supporting Avignon, with the understanding that he would abdicate voluntarily if that would help to end the division in the church. This he later refused to do, however, when asked to resign by the French princes who had been among his supporters. Eighteen of his 23 cardinals deserted him, and the papal palace in Avignon was besieged by the French (1398). In 1403 Benedict escaped from the palace to Provence, rallied his cardinals, and—largely through the support of Louis, duc d’Orléans—won back the obedience of France. He began negotiations to reach a compromise with the reigning pope Gregory XII (1407), but they came to nothing, and in 1408 the French declared themselves neutral in the dispute. In June 1409 the Council of Pisa, summoned by the rival colleges of cardinals to end the rift, pronounced both popes deposed and elected Alexander V in their stead. Benedict, still possessing the allegiance of some states, refused to submit to the Council of Pisa, but he subsequently had to take refuge in his castle at Peñíscola in 1415. On July 26, 1417, when the Council of Constance pronounced Benedict deposed, he lost all governmental recognition except that of Armagnac (in France) and of Scotland. But Benedict, who had maintained his claims against three Roman popes (Boniface IX, Innocent VII, and Gregory XII) and two antipopes whose claims derived from the Council of Pisa (Alexander V and John XXIII), refused to yield to Pope Martin V, who was elected in November 1417 to achieve unity. Benedict maintained to the end of his life that he was the rightful pope and created four new cardinals as late as November 1422.
