Bernard Cardinal Law, original name in full Bernard Francis Law,  (born November 4, 1931, Torreón, Mexico—died December 20, 2017, Rome, Italy), American prelate who was head (1984–2002) of the archdiocese of Boston before he resigned in disgrace after it was revealed that he had protected sexually abusive priests for years.
Law’s father was a U.S. Army colonel and his mother a concert pianist. He attended high school in the U.S. Virgin Islands. After graduating from Harvard University with a degree in history, he studied for the priesthood and was ordained in 1961. His initial assignment was in Natchez, Mississippi, the poorest diocese in the United States. An outspoken supporter of civil rights, he received death threats for the views he expressed while serving as editor of the weekly newspaper of the diocese of Natchez-Jackson. In 1968 Law went to Washington, D.C., to serve as executive director of the American bishops’ Committee on Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs. Five years later he was named bishop of the diocese of Springfield–Cape Girardeau in southern Missouri. As head of that diocese, he opened the first home for battered women in Springfield and set up a centre for Vietnamese refugees that became a national model.
In 1984 Law succeeded Humberto Cardinal Medeiros as head of the archdiocese of Boston, and he soon became a figure of national prominence when he denounced Democratic vice presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro for her support of abortion rights. He was elevated by John Paul II to the College of Cardinals in 1985. On a visit to Cuba in 1990, Law met with Pres. Fidel Castro. It was the first of several conversations they had and gave the cardinal a role in helping to pave the way for the pope’s visit to Cuba in 1998.
When 2002 began, Law was the senior Roman Catholic cardinal in the United States and the chairman of the bishops’ Committee on International Policy, but as the year drew to a close, he had resigned his position as head of his archdiocese and apologized for what he called his “shortcomings and mistakes” in response to allegations of sexual misconduct against priests. The conviction and sentencing of Rev. John Geoghan for having molested a 10-year-old boy spurred lawsuits against the cardinal for his failure to discipline the priest. When documents were released in April 2002 showing that he had also ignored warnings for years about such conduct by another priest, Rev. Paul Shanley, prominent Catholics began to call for Law’s resignation. In November, after meeting with some victims of clergy sexual abuse, Law said that he had acquired a “far deeper awareness of this terrible evil.” He stepped down in December after lawyers released 3,000 pages of files showing how Law had routinely transferred accused clergy to other parishes without disciplining them. After his resignation, Law became involved in a large number of organizations in Rome and was given authority in several of these.
