Blessed Clemens August, Graf von Galen,  (born March 16, 1878, Dinklage, Oldenburg, Germany—died March 22, 1946, Münster), Roman Catholic bishop of Münster, Germany, who was noted for his public opposition to Nazism.
Galen was ordained in 1904 in Münster, where, as a priest at St. Lambert’s, he published his Die Pest des Laizismus und ihre Erscheinungsformen (1932; “The Plague of Laicism and Its Manifestations”), deploring what he deemed the godlessness of post-World War I Germany. He was made bishop of Münster in 1933. At first Galen hoped that the Nazis would restore Germany to the position of respect that it had lost in World War I. But, disenchanted with the anti-Catholic propaganda and racism of Adolf Hitler’s regime, Galen soon became a powerful critic of the Nazis.
His opposition to the Nazis, particularly their racism and totalitarianism, began on Easter 1934 and continued unabated. He frequently complained directly to Hitler when he felt that the German dictator had violated the concordat he had signed in 1933 with the Vatican. When in November 1936 the Oldenburg Nazis removed all crucifixes from the schools, Galen’s protest sparked a public demonstration, and the order was canceled. In July and August 1941 Galen preached against the general lawlessness of the Gestapo, the confiscation of religious property, and the T4 Program instituted by Hitler in 1939—a program involving the systematic murder of more than 70,000 sick, elderly, mentally retarded, physically infirm, emotionally distraught, and disabled Germans, who were an embarrassment to the myth of Aryan supremacy. On August 3, 1941, he grounded his sermon on the biblical commandment not to kill:
Copies of the sermon were secretly circulated in Germany and among German troops. According to some sources, they also were dropped as leaflets by Allied pilots. In part because of Galen’s public protest, the T4 program was formally halted, though it continued clandestinely. Reluctant to transform Galen into a martyr, the Nazi government put him under virtual house arrest but deported priests serving in his diocese and took violent retribution against at least three priests who had distributed the sermon. Documents discovered later showed that the Nazis were close to a decision to hang Galen but decided to wait until they achieved a victory in World War II. Galen was named a cardinal on Febuary18, 1946. On October 9, 2005, he was beatified by the church, largely because of his role in opposing the T4 Program.
