Books of the Chronicles, also called (in early Roman Catholic translation into English) Paralipomenon I And Ii,  two Old Testament books that were originally part of a larger work that included the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. These three (Ezra and Nehemiah were one book in the Jewish canon) were the final books of the Hebrew Bible. Together they survey Israel’s history from Adam to the activity of Ezra and Nehemiah in the period after the Babylonian Exile (6th century bc). The uniformity of language, style, and ideas marks the work as the product of a single author, known as the Chronicler, who probably lived about 350–300 bc.
The material of the Chronicles lists genealogies from Adam to King Saul (1 Chronicles 1–2) and covers the death of Saul and the reign of King David (1 Chronicles 10–29), the reign of King Solomon (2 Chronicles 1–9), and from the division of the monarchy into the northern and southern kingdoms to the end of the Babylonian Exile (2 Chronicles 10–36).
The Chronicler used the Old Testament books of Samuel and Kings as sources for his historical account freely modified to accord with the Chronicler’s own interests and point of view. Nothing is admitted that would lessen David’s glory, but much is added to enhance it. For example, he is given credit (1 Chronicles 22) for making preparations to build the Temple of Jerusalem, though according to 1 Kings 5–7 it was Solomon who planned and built the Temple.
Solomon is likewise glorified, and unfavourable aspects of his reign (as viewed in 1 Kings 11) are omitted. The Chronicler’s single-minded interest in the Temple causes him to omit mention of the palace built during Solomon’s reign (1 Kings 7). The history of the divided monarchy is especially noteworthy because the Chronicler excludes almost all material from the books of Kings concerning the northern kingdom of Israel. Obviously, his interest was centred on the southern kingdom of Judah, ruled by the house of David and site of the Temple of Jerusalem.
The genealogies in 1 Chronicles 1–9 also serve the Chronicler’s interests, for they are designed to show that the true Israel came to be realized in the kingdom of David. In the rest of his work the Chronicler also shows that he was interested in institutions that provided for the continuity of the true Israel: the Temple of Jerusalem and the Davidic dynasty. The historian thus uses even genealogies to serve an important function in the presentation of his people’s history.
The writer’s concern about the true Israel is not surprising, for the reconstitution of Israel’s life after the Babylonian Exile required a redefinition of Israel’s identity. This restatement was especially important since the deportation policies of Assyria (for the northern kingdom in 721 bc) and Babylonia (for the southern kingdom in 597 and 586 bc) had introduced alien peoples and religious practices into the Israelite scene. The Chronicler’s decision to ignore the northern kingdom almost entirely indicates his bias against the Samaritan community in the north.
