Book of Confessions,  compilation of creeds and confessions that was prepared by a committee of the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. and was adopted by that church in 1967. It includes the Nicene Creed, the Apostles’ Creed, the Scots Confession (1560), the Heidelberg Catechism (1562), the Second Helvetic Confession (1566), the Westminster Confession and the Westminster Shorter Catechism (1648), the Barmen Declaration (1934), and the new Confession of 1967.
The union that formed the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. in 1958 had stipulated that the new church would draft “a brief contemporary statement of faith.” The assumption had been that this new statement would be a brief and simple version of the Westminster Confession. The committee that began work on the project in 1959 soon found, however, that a simplified version of a 300-year-old confession would not suffice as a statement of faith. The committee then secured permission to develop a Book of Confessions that would deal adequately with the problem of continuity and tradition and would include a new creed.
The Confession of 1967 was designed explicitly to presuppose, continue, and supplement the historic creeds of the Book of Confessions without repeating their contents. Comprising three major sections, “God’s Work of Reconciliation,” “The Ministry of Reconciliation,” and “The Fulfillment of Reconciliation,” the new creed was primarily concerned with the task of the church, Presbyterian or any other, in the modern world. Reconciliation in Christ, the confession asserted, must mean the willingness to reexamine even the contemporary church’s conceptions of right and wrong. The confession illustrates this point briefly by reference to the modern problems of racism, war, poverty, and the breakdown of personal relations. The Confession of 1967 also expresses clearly the church’s conviction that critical study of the Bible is an aid to, rather than an attack upon, the use of the Bible in the church.
