Byzantine rite,  the system of liturgical practices and discipline observed by the Eastern Orthodox Church and by the majority of Eastern rite churches, which are in communion with Rome.
The Byzantine rite originated in the Greek city of Antioch (now in southern Turkey), one of the earliest and most celebrated centres of Christianity, but it was developed and perfected in Byzantium, or Constantinople (now Istanbul). The rite was associated primarily with the Great Church of Constantinople and used the Greek language. As Constantinople extended its influence, however, the rite lost its exclusive Greek character and became Byzantine as it was translated into the vernacular of the diverse peoples who adopted it.
Several autocephalous (ecclesiastically independent) Eastern Orthodox churches follow canonical rites derived from the original Byzantine rite. The number of these churches has varied in history but has included the Church of Constantinople (Istanbul), the Church of Alexandria (Egypt), the Church of Antioch (with headquarters in Damascus, Syria), and the churches of Jerusalem, Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, Serbia, Romania, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Albania, Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, and America. Several of these rites have been suppressed or dispersed by governments in the past.
In the early Christian church, liturgies developed gradually and were essentially formed by the 6th century, although further developments occurred. Of the three liturgies in use by Byzantine rite churches, the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom is celebrated most frequently and is the normal church service. The Liturgy of St. Basil the Great is longer and is used on 10 special occasions each year. The Liturgy of the Preconsecrated Offerings, also known as the Liturgy of the Presanctified or the Liturgy of St. Gregory the Great, is celebrated on Wednesdays and Fridays during Lent and from Monday to Wednesday of Holy Week. A fourth liturgy, that of St. James the Apostle, is very rarely used. The liturgical language varies from country to country, but the Byzantine rite churches in the United States have generally continued using the language of the parent church.
