Ceremonial object,  any object used in a ritual or a religious ceremony.
Throughout the history of religions and cultures, objects used in cults, rituals, and sacred ceremonies have almost always been of both utilitarian and symbolic natures. Ceremonial and ritualistic objects have been utilized as a means for establishing or maintaining communication between the sacred (the transcendent, or supernatural, realm) and the profane (the realm of time, space, and cause and effect). On occasion, such objects have been used to compel the sacred (or divine) realm to act or react in a way that is favourable to the participants of the ceremonies or to the persons or activities with which such rituals are concerned, or to prevent the transcendent realm from harming or endangering them. These objects thus can be mediatory devices to contact the divine world, as, for example, the drums of shamans (religious personages with healing and psychic-transformation powers). Conversely, they can be mediatory devices used by a god or other supernatural being to relate to humans in the profane realm. They may also be used to ensure that a chief or sovereign of a tribe or nation achieves, and is recognized to have, the status of divinity in cultic or community ceremonies. Of such a nature may be cult statues bearing the name of a king associated with that of the Hindu god Shiva in areas under Indian influence (such as in ancient Vietnam, Cambodia, and Indonesia, where the lingam was worshipped under a double name—Indreshvara [Indra, king of the gods, plus Ishvara, Lord, a name of Shiva])—or the Buddhist “body of glory” statues in Cambodia dating from the end of the 7th century. The religious dance masks of many societies, including those used in ancient Tibet and in Buddhist sects of Japan, may to some extent also belong to this class.
Because such objects vary as much in nature as they do in form and material, they are difficult to evaluate. If limited strictly to religious practices, an inventory of ceremonial and ritualistic objects remains incomplete, because these objects have played significant roles on solemn secular occasions, such as consecrations, enthronements, and coronations, which may be closely linked to the divine order, as in Hindu-, Buddhist-, and Christian-influenced cultures.
Constituting a most-significant category of cult objects are representations of a deity. Though such representations are often depicted in the form of statues and images (icons) of divine or sacred beings, they may also be either figurative or symbolic, the meanings often being equivalent. In Tantrism (an Indian esoteric, magical, and philosophical belief system centred on devotion to natural energy), for example, the sacred Sanskrit syllable Om—which is a transcendent word charged with cosmological (order-of-the-universe) symbolism—is identified with the feminine counterpart of the god. In its written form, particularly on Tibetan banners (thang-kas), the word Om (often corresponding with the feminine counterpart—Tara—of the patron of Tibet) is considered to be eminently sacred, even more so, in some instances, than an anthropomorphic (human-form) divine effigy.
Statues and painted images occur most frequently in religious iconography, as noted above. These are often viewed as the permanent embodiments of the deities they represent, whether they are located in sacred places of religious communities, such as temples, shrines, or chapels, or on domestic altars, which contain statues or icons of the divinities of prosperity and fertility, mother goddesses, household gods, saints, relics, the tablet of the ancestors in ancient China, and other similar domestic cult objects. Many household cult objects are made from clay or terra-cotta and are sometimes multicoloured. The material of which major cult objects are composed is often explicitly defined and assumes a certain importance. If the statue is fashioned in wood, the choice of the wood (acacia, sandal, or any other) is symbolically important because it is considered auspicious. By the same token, the choice of stone is likewise important, depending on the region. If metal is chosen, it is one that is deemed precious (e.g., golden statues bring prosperity). In the case of bronze statues and other cult objects, the composition is carefully defined and often corresponds to alloys to which symbolic values are attached. In addition to a proper and distinct form and material, the technique of fabricating and the procedural patterns of composing such objects are controlled by traditional rules that have become established rituals in many religions—sophisticated and not. In the production of statues in human or animal form, the last procedure is often the “opening the eyes” (i.e., the painting of the eyes of a statue of a deity or inserting gold in them by an officiating priest during the installation of the statue [pratishtha] in the sanctuary, along with the reciting of appropriate prayers that make the statue “living” and “real”), particularly in Brahmanic India and Chinese-influenced areas (see also religious symbolism and iconography).
The practice of wearing special garments for conducting rites, participating in worship, or even witnessing such ceremonies is very unevenly distributed, and the conceptions associated with this practice are highly varied and complex.
The types and varieties of instruments used in worship and religious ceremonies are almost innumerable. The role they play in ritual occasions may be as containers and sacred furniture, as objects with properties necessary for worship, and as “mediatory” objects through which a magical or mystical connection is believed to be made between the human and divine worlds. There are also the materials used in bloody or nonbloody sacrifices.
Amulets (charms) have been used for protection in all ages and in all types of human societies. They persist even today in industrial societies, in which they are mass-produced by the most modern methods (e.g., mustard seeds encased in plastic to be worn as necklaces reminding the wearer of Jesus’ words about the growth of the kingdom of heaven). The purpose of most amulets is not so much religious as it is for protection against danger, sickness, and bad luck (e.g., the “mystical eye” of the ancient Egyptians or the “Hand of Fatima” of Muslims). The same is true of talismans, which offer the additional advantage of conferring supernatural power on other people, even on the deity, from a distance. Dancers’ masks and jewels, such as earrings, bracelets, necklaces, and belts, may be classified with amulets. Such objects are individually worshipped in order to gain their goodwill among some Hindus in India and among the Pueblo and Navajo Indians of North America.
