Chaitanya, also spelled Caitanya, in full Shri Krishna Chaitanya, also called Gauranga, original name Vishvambhara Mishra,  (born 1485, Navadvipa, Bengal, India—died 1533, Puri, Orissa), Hindu mystic whose mode of worshipping the god Krishna  with ecstatic song and dance had a profound effect on Vaishnavism in Bengal.
The son of a Brahman, he grew up in an atmosphere of piety and affection. He received a thorough education in the Sanskrit scriptures and, after the death of his father, set up a school of his own. At the age of 22 he made a pilgrimage to Gaya to perform his father’s shraddha (death anniversary ceremony). While there he underwent a profound religious experience that completely transformed his outlook and personality. He returned to Navadvipa a God-intoxicated man, entirely indifferent to all worldly concerns.
A group of devotees soon gathered around Chaitanya and joined him in the congregational worship called kirtana, which consists of the choral singing of hymns and the name of God, often accompanied by dance movements and culminating in states of trance. In 1510 he received formal initiation as an ascetic and took the name Shri Krishna Chaitanya. His intention was to leave for Vrindavana (the area near Mathura that was the scene of Krishna’s childhood and youth), but at the insistence of his mother he agreed instead to settle in Puri, where his disciples could more easily keep in touch with him.
Chaitanya neither organized a sect nor wrote any works on theology, entrusting this work to his disciples (see Chaitanya movement). Nevertheless, his simple life of intense religious emotion proved at once the source and the impetus of a great religious movement. Frequent and prolonged experiences of religious rapture, however, took their toll on his health; he himself diagnosed some of his seizures as epileptic. The exact date and circumstances of his death are unknown, and many legends have sprung up, such as his merger into a temple image or (some sources declare) his accidental drowning while in a state of religious ecstasy.
