Charles Freer Andrews,  (born 1871, Carlisle, England—died April 5, 1940, Calcutta [now Kolkata], India), English missionary whose experiences in India led him to advocate for Indian independence and for the rights of Indian labourers around the world.
Andrews was the son of a minister in the Catholic Apostolic (Irvingite) Church, but he converted to the Church of England in 1889. After earning a degree in classics at Pembroke College, Cambridge, he pursued a career in the ministry and received ordination as an Anglican priest in 1897.
Andrews went to India as a missionary in 1904 and began teaching at St. Stephen’s College, Delhi. Shocked by the racism that he found in British India, Andrews sought out friendships with Indians and immersed himself in the study of Hindu and Buddhist traditions and literature. Through his acquaintance with Gopal Krishna Gokhale, a social reformer and nationalist, Andrews became aware of the maltreatment and exploitation suffered by Indian indentured labourers throughout the British Empire. In 1914 Andrews traveled to South Africa at Gokhale’s urging to participate in the campaign for Indian rights there. In Durban Andrews met Mahatma Gandhi and was impressed by his nonviolent resistance movement; the two remained close friends afterward.
When he returned to India, Andrews left his teaching position at St. Stephens and settled at the experimental school at Shantiniketan founded by the poet and philosopher Rabindranath Tagore, whom Andrews had met in London in 1912. Tagore’s calls for social justice and his ideas about the synthesis of Eastern and Western culture strongly shaped Andrews’s spiritual and political views.
Andrews spent the rest of his career campaigning for Indian independence and Indian workers’ rights. He visited Fiji, Kenya, and Sri Lanka to report on the treatment of Indian labourers, and he often acted as an intermediary between the British administration and Indian communities in British colonies. He became the president of the All-India Trade Union Congress in 1925. In his later years Andrews was a leading member of the India Conciliation Group, which lobbied British politicians and members of the press for Indian independence.
