Chen Tao, (Chinese: “True Way”),  new religious movement that was founded by Chen Hong-min in Pei-pu, Hsin-chu county, Taiwan, in 1993.
Chen, a former professor of sociology at Chianan College of Pharmacology and Science, founded a religion that is an eclectic mixture of Buddhism, popular religion, Christianity, and New Age Western cults with belief in extraterrestrial intervention in human affairs. Chen laid out a complex theology based on ideas of spiritual energy—a variation of Chinese ch’i-kung thought—modifying traditional Chinese popular ideas in accordance with his reading of Western physics and Asian and Western ideas of demonology. Preaching that much of the world is dominated by evil spirits, he integrated Christian millennialist and eschatological ideas into his theology, calling himself a prophet who was able to chart the course of the coming conflagration and the road to individual salvation. Pei-pu was the chosen place because, according to Chen, it was a place where spiritual energy created by God would flow from heaven to earth.
Chen developed his cult, published texts and works on his doctrine, and, according to some sources, convinced his followers to give him money to gain passage aboard the spaceships—disguised as clouds—that would land on earth in 1999 and take them away. He also persuaded these followers to move to San Dimas, California, U.S., to await God’s coming; they migrated in 1995. He then became convinced that Garland, Texas, would be the place where God would come, for to his ears “Garland” sounded like “Godland.” He and his followers then moved to Texas in 1997.
Chen predicted that God would announce his plans and materialize on earth in human form, recognizable to Chen, on March 31, 1998. Before his incarnation—or, as Chen believed, simultaneous multi-incarnation—God would announce his formal Second Coming on channel 18 on television on March 25. When the day came and nothing happened, Chen revised his predictions. In the weeks that followed, he relocated his cult to New York state, and many of the members returned to Taiwan or applied for legal immigrant status in the United States. See also millennialism.
