Chiwara, also spelled Chi wara or Tyiwara,  antelope figure of the Bambara (Bamana) people of Mali that represents the spirit that taught humans the fundamentals of agriculture. The Bambara honour Chiwara though art and dance.
According to Bambara legend, Chiwara used his antlers and pointed stick to dig into the earth, making it possible for humans to cultivate the land. Humans watched Chiwara and then tilled their own soil. Chiwara used his hoofs to cover the seeds, and humans, observing closely, became experts at planting seeds. The Bambara farms became so bountiful that they had too much corn for their own use. They wasted it, thinking that it was easy to cultivate. Chiwara grew disappointed and buried himself in the earth. This disturbed the elders of the Bambara, who regretted that they had lost him. They then ordered that a mask be made in memory of Chiwara, to honour him for teaching them how to farm the land. Many elaborate headdresses have been created in his honour.
The Chiwara mask is held for the persons who are the best and fastest workers of the land, and so it is passed from one person to another depending on skill and expertise. It is a high honour to be able to wear the mask and dance the ceremonial Chiwara dance. The dance, representing both male and female genders, commemorates Chiwara with the dancers wearing beautifully carved headdresses representing antelopes. The dancers leap and turn, moving their heads and feet like the antelope, their movements grounded in hundreds of years of tradition. The dance, which suggests fertility, reproduction, propitiation of the spirits and ancestors, and gratitude to Chiwara, carries with it moral lessons and religious symbolism.
There are three principal kinds of Chiwara sculptures. Each one represents a region inhabited by the Bambara. The style that has the vertical antelope shape is usually found in the southeastern part of Mali, between Koutiala and Ségou. This style reduces the body and hoofs to a minimum but elongates the neck and the horns. The male antelope carries a mane, and the female with a slender neck has a young baby on the back. A second kind of sculpture is more naturalistic than the first. The head of the image is attached to the body with metal clips. A third kind of sculpture is found in the region around Bougouni, in southern Mali. Here the artist presents the most abstract types of Chiwara, using angles and forms that are stylized and unique.
