Chögyam Trungpa, also called Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche,  (born February 1940, Kahm, Tibet—died April 4, 1987, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada), abbot of the Surmang Monastery in Tibet (China) and founder of the Tibetan Buddhist organization Shambhala International, which was established in the United States in the second half of the 20th century to disseminate Buddhist teachings, especially the practice of meditation. He is frequently referred to as Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche, the Tibetan word rinpoche (“precious jewel”) being an honorific title often conferred on Tibetan Buddhist leaders.
Chögyam Trungpa fled Tibet after the Chinese took control of the region in 1959, moving first to England, where he studied at the University of Oxford, and then to Scotland, where he founded a monastery. In 1970 he moved to the United States and founded a meditation centre, Tail of the Tiger (now Karmê Chöling), in Vermont, the first of many in North America. In 1971 he moved to Boulder, Colorado, where he established Vajradhatu (now Shambhala) International.
Trungpa’s followers regarded him as a tulku (“incarnation”) of the 14th-century Tibetan lama Kunga Gyaltsen. Although he received training in both the Kagyu and Nyingma Tibetan traditions, Trungpa later expressed adherence to the Rimay, a nonsectarian Tibetan Buddhist movement. He invited a wide spectrum of Buddhist teachers to speak at Naropa Institute (now Naropa University), a school he founded in Boulder in 1974 that combined contemplative studies with Western academics. Adopting Western dress and manners, he emphasized meditation and presented Buddhism in a nonsectarian idiom that Westerners would understand.
In 1986 Trungpa moved the headquarters of Shambhala International to Nova Scotia, Canada, to escape what he considered the excessive materialism of American society. After his death he was succeeded as head of the movement by his student Thomas Rich (also known as Ösel Tendzin). Rich died several years later and was succeeded by Sawang Ösel Rangdröl Mukpo (now known as Sakyong Mipham Rinpoche), Trungpa’s son.
In the early 21st century, Shambhala International had more than 100 centres in North America and Europe. The Great Stupa of Dharmakaya, built to honour Trungpa, was consecrated in 2001 near the northern Colorado town of Red Feather Lakes, located about 30 miles (50 km) northwest of Fort Collins.
