Church in Wales,  independent Anglican church in Wales that changed from the Roman Catholic faith during the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century. At the time of the Reformation, the Welsh church was directly controlled by the English church and was thus separated from Rome when Henry VIII declared himself the head of the Church of England (1534).
Christianity in Wales dates from at least the 4th century, and by the 7th century Roman and Celtic missionaries had converted the entire country. When the pagan Anglo-Saxons invaded Britain in the 5th century, Wales became one of the strongholds of the Celtic church. The church clung to its independence and refused to submit to the rules and customs of the Roman Catholic Church until the 12th century, when the archbishop of Canterbury gained supremacy over the Welsh Christians.
The Reformation was generally accepted with little dissent in Wales, but in the 17th and 18th centuries the church went through a period of decay, primarily because of lack of leadership from Englishmen who were appointed to important positions in the Welsh church. The Methodist revival that began in the 18th century sparked the dramatic decline of Anglicanism in Wales, as the majority of the Welsh people left the Welsh Anglican church and joined the new church. In 1920 it was disestablished, though the church subsequently gained in numbers and strength.
The church allowed the ordination of women as priests in 1996 and installed its first woman priest in January 1997. By 2008 more than 20 percent of priests were women. In 2013 the church government approved the ordination of women as bishops.
A member of the Anglican Communion, a worldwide association of Anglican churches, the Church in Wales forms one province made up of six dioceses. The bishops of the dioceses are elected by representatives from the dioceses, and they elect one of their number as archbishop of the church. In 2002 Rowan Williams, then archbishop of Wales, became the first Welsh-born archbishop of Canterbury, the spiritual leader of the Anglican Communion.
The Church in Wales is the second largest Christian body in Wales. It claimed about 69,000 weekly attendees in the first decade of the 21st century.
