Church of Christ,  any of several conservative Protestant churches, found chiefly in the United States. They are strongest in parts of the Midwest and in the western and southern parts of the country. Each church is known locally as a Church of Christ and its members as Christians, and each church is autonomous in government, with elders, deacons, and a minister or ministers. There is no organization beyond the local church.
The early history of this group is identical to that of the Disciples of Christ. They developed from various religious movements in the United States in the early 19th century, especially those led by Barton W. Stone in Kentucky and Thomas Campbell and Alexander Campbell in Pennsylvania and West Virginia. These men had all been Presbyterians. They pleaded for the Bible as the only standard of faith, without additional creeds, and for the unity of the people of God by the restoration of New Testament Christianity. Refusing affiliation with any sect, they called themselves simply Christians.
Controversies developed among the Christians about the middle of the 19th century, principally over the scriptural authorization for organized mission societies and the use of instrumental music in worship. In 1906 in the federal census of religion there was added to the earlier listing of Disciples of Christ a new listing of Churches of Christ that enumerated those congregations opposing organized mission societies and instrumental music. The New Testament mentions neither, and, therefore, the Churches of Christ consider them to be unauthorized innovations.
After the division, the Churches of Christ continued to grow. Though the churches oppose organized mission societies, missionary work is supported by individual churches and is carried on in 100 foreign fields. Members of the Churches of Christ support more than 20 liberal arts colleges and numerous high schools.
A hallmark of worship in the Churches of Christ tradition is unaccompanied congregational singing. Baptism is of adults, and the Lord’s Supper is observed as a memorial of Christ’s death. The Churches of Christ affirm the orthodox teaching of the person of Christ and the Bible as the sole rule of faith and practice with the primacy of the New Testament as the revelation of the will of God. Most churches do not take part in interdenominational activities.
In 1997 the group reported 1,800,000 members and 14,400 congregations in the United States and 8,000 members and 140 congregations in Canada. There are no officers or headquarters.
