Church of Cyprus, also called Orthodox Church Of Cyprus,  one of the oldest autocephalous, or ecclesiastically independent, churches of the Eastern Orthodox communion. Its independence, first recognized by the third ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431), was reaffirmed by the Council in Trullo (692) and was never lost, not even during the occupation of the island by the crusaders. Under the feudal French dynasty of the Lusignans (1191–1489) and the Venetians (1489–1571), the efforts of the Latin bishops to submit the Orthodox Church of Cyprus to the pope’s authority were unsuccessful. Until the Turkish conquest of the island in 1571, the Greek bishops were often submitted to the authority of the Latin archbishop and forced to serve as auxiliaries of their Latin colleagues.
The highest ecclesiastical authority lay with the synod, composed of the archbishop of Nicosia and the three other bishops of the island—Paphos, Citium, and Kyrenia—who were, and still are, elected by both clergy and laity, each of the four bishoprics being divided into several parishes.
The bishops became the natural leaders of national resistance: during the Greek War of Independence (1821–32), all the bishops on the island, as well as several abbots, were hanged by the Turks, while in the years of British control (1878–1958), the bishops took an active lead in the Greek Cypriot movement for union with Greece (énosis). In 1956 the Archbishop Makarios and the Bishop of Kyrenia were exiled by the British. When the new Cypriot republic became independent in 1960, the church was assured of its position as an autocephalous and independent Greek Orthodox Church on the basis of its old titles, and Archbishop Makarios was elected the first president of the new republic.
Monastic life has developed greatly since the beginning of the republic. There are several monasteries, the most important being the monastery of Kykkou. Parish clergy are educated in an undergraduate seminary; higher theological education is obtained at the University of Athens. The church keeps several educational and philanthropic institutions and publishes Apostolos Barnabas, a monthly ecclesiastical–theological review.
