Convocations of Canterbury and York,  in the Church of England, ecclesiastical assemblies of the provinces of Canterbury and of York that meet two or three times a year and, since the mid-19th century, have been concerned particularly with the reform of the canons of ecclesiastical law.
Their origin can be traced to the time of Archbishop Theodore (668–690). Later they became, in effect, a parliament in which, in addition to transacting ecclesiastical business, the clergy taxed themselves for the benefit of the royal exchequer.
At the Reformation, the Act of Submission of the Clergy (1533) provided that convocation was not to meet without the permission of the king. For the next 140 years the convocations were busy with the Reformation settlement, working with the monarch and Parliament. After the Restoration of Charles II in 1660, the clergy evidently tacitly agreed to abandon their claim to tax themselves. In 1663 they voted subsidies for the king, but since then they have been taxed, like the rest of the nation, by Parliament. After the Glorious Revolution (1688), convocation began to exhibit an independence of thought that was embarrassing to the government. In 1717 King George I suspended convocation, which then met only for innocuous formal sessions until the mid-19th century.
Since the 15th century both convocations have been divided into two houses: the upper consists of the archbishop and diocesan bishops of the province; the lower consists of representatives of the inferior clergy. Convocation is summoned by the archbishop, who, in obedience to a writ from the sovereign, issues a mandate. The sovereign may issue letters of business to the convocations when he desires their opinion on any matter. They sometimes pass resolutions known as acts of convocation, which, though influential, have no effect in law.
With the Synodical Government Measure of 1969, most of the powers of the convocations, including the power to legislate by canon, passed into the hands of a general synod composed of members of the houses of bishops, members of the houses of clergy, and a house of laity. Although the convocations continue to meet, their transactions are for the most part formal.
