Cormac Murphy-O’Connor,  (born August 24, 1932, Reading, Berkshire, England—died September 1, 2017, Westminster, London), British religious leader and former cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church.
Three of Murphy-O’Connor’s uncles and two of his brothers were priests. He himself was ordained in 1956. After serving parishes in Portsmouth and Fareham, he became director of vocations for the diocese of Portsmouth. In 1966 he was named private secretary and chaplain to Bishop Derek Worlock, and in 1971 he was appointed rector of the English College in Rome. In that position he hosted Archbishop of Canterbury Donald Coggan during the latter’s visit to Pope Paul VI in 1977.
After being appointed bishop of Arundel and Brighton in 1977, Murphy-O’Connor gained a reputation as a champion of ecumenism. He became cochairman of the Anglican–Roman Catholic International Commission in 1982 and chairman of the British Catholic bishops’ Committee for Christian Unity in 1983. In 2000 Archbishop of Canterbury George Carey awarded Murphy-O’Connor a Lambeth doctorate in divinity (an academic doctorate awarded in recognition of service to the Christian church or after a course of academic study), making him the first Roman Catholic bishop since the Reformation to hold the degree. That year he succeeded the late Basil Cardinal Hume as archbishop of Westminster, the leader of Great Britain’s Roman Catholics. He was elevated to the College of Cardinals by Pope John Paul II in 2001, a post he held until his retirement in 2009.
As Britain’s most prominent Catholic, Murphy-O’Connor did not shy away from controversial issues. In a 2000 interview with The Guardian newspaper, the archbishop stated that, although priests who had accepted celibacy when they were ordained should keep that vow, marriage was not incompatible with the priesthood. A few months later he publicly declared that he had made a mistake in the 1980s in appointing as chaplain to Gatwick Airport near London an alleged pedophile who was subsequently convicted of nine sexual assaults; many criticized his response as inadequate. A proponent of ecumenism and interfaith dialogue, Murphy-O’Connor strove to defuse the negative reaction of non-Catholic clergy in Britain to the Vatican declaration Dominus Iesus (2000; “The Lord Jesus”), which stated that the Roman Catholic Church was the only instrument of salvation. In his final sermon before his retirement, Murphy-O’Connor issued a controversial critique of secularism that some viewed as a denunciation of atheism. He published The Family of the Church in 1984.
