cremation,  the practice of reducing a corpse to its essential elements by burning.
The practice of cremation on open fires was introduced to the Western world by the Greeks as early as 1000 bce. They seem to have adopted cremation from some northern people as an imperative of war, to ensure soldiers slain in alien territory a homeland funeral attended by family and fellow citizens. Corpses were incinerated on the battlefield; then the ashes were gathered up and sent to the homeland for ceremonial entombment. Although ground burial continued (even a symbolic sprinkling of earth over the body fulfilled requirements, as Antigone reveals), cremation became so closely associated with valour and manly virtue, patriotism, and military glory that it was regarded as the only fitting conclusion for an epic life.
The Iliad makes plain how elaborate and important cremations were. In that, Zeus himself forced Achilles to surrender Hector’s body to his father so that he, King Priam of Troy, could have it cremated royally. The greater the hero, the greater was the conflagration. Achilles set the pattern in providing a pyre 100 feet (30 metres) square for his friend Patroclus. Achilles himself was incinerated even more gloriously after his death—in “raiment of the gods” after 17 days of mourning. After the flames were quenched with wine, his bones were bathed in oil and wine and placed in a golden urn with those of Patroclus. Lavish funeral feasting and funeral games followed, and a great tomb was erected for him on a headland above the Hellespont.
The Romans followed Greek and Trojan fashion in cremating their military heroes. Virgil’s Aeneid scornfully contrasts the etiquette of the “unhappy” Latins with that of the Romans’ Trojan ancestors. Virgil describes how during a 12-day truce, declared so that both armies could cremate dead warriors, the Latins burned many without ritual or count and later heaped the bones together, covering them with a mound of earth. The Romans, on the other hand, observed all the proprieties. They covered the pyre with leaves and fronted it with cypresses; after it was set ablaze, troops shouting war cries circled it and cast trophies taken from the slain Latins into the fire. They poured the blood of animals on the flames and, when the fires were quenched, washed the bones in wine and placed them in urns. Cremation became such a status symbol in Rome that constructing and renting space in columbaria (vaults or similar structures with niches in the walls to receive the ashes of the dead) became a profitable business. By about 100 ce, however, cremations in the Roman Empire were stopped, perhaps because of the spread of Christianity. Although cremation was not explicitly taboo among Christians, it was not encouraged by them because of pagan associations and because of the concern that it might interfere with the promised resurrection of the body and its reunion with the soul. The most practical reason is that cremations were threatening to bring about serious wood shortages, since so much timber was being felled for pyres.
The pagan Scandinavians favoured cremation, believing that it helped free the spirit from the flesh and also that it kept the dead from harming the living. These pagans’ practices paralleled the Greek and Roman epic cremations. After the Icelandic conversion to Christianity in 1000 ce, cremation was rare in western Europe until the 19th century, except in emergencies. During an outbreak of the Black Death in 1656, for example, the bodies of 60,000 victims were burned in Naples during a single week.
In India and some other countries where the custom is ancient, cremation is considered very desirable. It is the wish of all devout Hindus to be incinerated in Varanasi. The waterfront of that holy city is lined with concrete and marble slabs on which pyres are erected. The remains are then deposited in the Ganges River. In some Asiatic countries cremation is available to only a favoured few: in Tibet it is usually reserved for the high lamas; in Laos it is for those who die “fortunately” (i.e., of natural causes at the end of a peaceful and prosperous life). Cremation ceremonies in Bali are colourful and gay. On a “lucky” day, bodies of a number of worthies, which had been temporarily buried or embalmed, are carried to a high and decorative tower made of wood and bamboo and cremated. Forty-two days later a second tower, with effigies instead of bodies, is burned to assist the soul on its journey toward the highest heaven. The ashes of the towers, like those of the bodies, are scattered on the water.
Cremation in the modern manner is very different. Open fires are not used; instead, the body is placed in a chamber where intense heat transforms it in an hour or two to a few pounds of white, powdery ash that is disposed of in accordance with law and sentiment: scattered in a garden or some other preferred spot, placed in an urn and kept at home, or taken to a cemetery for burial in a small plot or placement in a columbarium.
The revival of interest in cremation in Europe and the United States began in 1874, when Queen Victoria’s surgeon, Sir Henry Thompson, published his influential book Cremation: The Treatment of the Body After Death. He also organized the Cremation Society of England in association with Anthony Trollope, Sir John Tenniel, the dukes of Bedford and Westminster, and other articulate critics of burial practices. Although it was not until 1884 that a British court first ruled cremation a legal procedure, it won immediate support on both sides of the Atlantic. For more than a century social and religious reformers had protested such practices as the long and sometimes disorderly wakes, or watches, held over the bodies of dead persons prior to burial. Physicians and sanitary engineers were alarmed at the practice of burial in cemeteries, holding the saturated burial grounds to be poisonous. The British movement prompted action in the United States, where the first crematorium was built in Washington, Pennsylvania, in 1876. Five years later the New York Cremation Society was organized; in 1913 the Cremation Association of America was organized. Growth of the practice has been slow in the United States, however, where by the 1970s only about 8 percent of the dead were cremated. It has been more readily accepted in some European and Asiatic countries: the figure in England, Germany, and Denmark, for example, is more than 50 percent. In Japan, where cremation was illegal in 1875, the practice has become almost universal.
As the shortage of cemetery space in urban areas becomes more acute and as objections are answered, cremation may become the chief form of burial. Many Protestant churches have actively supported it; the Roman Catholic church has announced that it is not prohibited. The Orthodox Jewish religion, however, continues to declare it forbidden. Legal objections—that it would allow crimes to go undetected—are being countered by improvements in techniques and standards in coroners’ offices. Cemetery owners and undertakers have also minimized their opposition, since cremation has proved no less profitable than more traditional methods of burial.
