David Yonggi Cho,  (born February 14, 1936, South Kyŏngsang province, Korea—died September 14, 2021, Seoul, South Korea), Korean religious leader and Christian evangelist who founded (1958) the Yoido Full Gospel Church (YFGC) in Seoul. He presided over the megachurch until 2008.
Cho was raised Buddhist. When he was 17, he became gravely ill from tuberculosis. He subsequently recovered, and, attributing his healing to the God of Christianity, he became a Christian. In 1958 he graduated from Seoul’s Full Gospel Theological Seminary (now Hansei University), which was operated by the Pentecostal Assemblies of God denomination, and opened a tent church on a hillside outside the city. At that time many Koreans were homeless and jobless as a consequence of the Korean War. Cho’s hopeful message and reports that he had performed faith healings attracted many of the unfortunate to his church
As the congregation grew, Cho moved his church first to downtown Seoul and then in 1973 to a new sanctuary on the city’s Yoido Island. Cho, fluent in English and Japanese, preached the Gospel in sermons that were broadcast on television and radio in South Korea, the United States, Japan, and elsewhere. By 1981 Yoido Full Gospel Church included about 200,000 people, and by the first decade of the 21st century it claimed some 1,000,000 worshippers and had sent more than 700 missionaries to hundreds of churches throughout the world.
Cho founded a newspaper, the Kook-min Daily, in 1988. The church operated its own television station (Full Gospel Television), a publishing house, and a Web site. It also undertook many social programs, including a welfare centre in Seoul that provided care for senior citizens who had no supporting families and vocational training to poverty-stricken young adults, a recycling drive to raise money for children in need of open-heart surgery, and “Bread of Love,” a program providing food to the poor and hungry. Cho served as chairman of the World Assemblies of God Fellowship between 1992 and 2000.
In 2008 Cho stepped down as senior pastor of YFGC. Six years later he was convicted of embezzling $12 million (U.S.) from the church. He was given a suspended sentence of three years and was fined nearly $5 million. One of his sons was also convicted and was handed a three-year sentence.
