Diego de Landa,  (born 1524, Cifuentes, Spain—died 1579, Mérida, Yucatán, Mexico), Spanish Franciscan priest and bishop of Yucatán who is best known for his classic account of Mayan culture and language, most of which he was also responsible for destroying.
Landa was born to a noble family and at age 17 joined the Franciscans. His religious fervour manifested itself early, and he asked to be sent as a missionary to the New World. Once in Mexico he learned the Yucatec Mayan language and tried through charitable works to help the indigenous people, who were decimated by disease (mostly smallpox) and starvation, and, by his account, he protected them as much as possible from brutalities inflicted on them by the Spanish colonists. He also is said to have done much translation work. By 1552 he had become head of the Izamal convent.
He became the Franciscan provincial (the superior of a province of a Roman Catholic religious order) of Yucatán in 1561. In this capacity he presided over a host of atrocities against the indigenous peoples, including imprisonment, enslavement, torture, and murder. Over the course of three months, some 4,500 Mayas were tortured. Nearly 200 died, and others were permanently damaged. The Franciscans used one particularly effective method borrowed from the Spanish Inquisition, a version of strappado, in which the victim’s wrists were secured to a rope and he was hanged by the wrists, sometimes with weights tied to his feet, while being flogged or splashed with hot wax.
Although Landa was sympathetic in many ways to the Maya people, he abhorred certain of their practices, particularly human sacrifice. When in July 1562 traces of human sacrifice were found in a cave containing sacred statues of the Maya, Landa in his religious zeal conducted an auto-da-fé at Maní. Some 5,000 Maya statues were utterly destroyed, and that was not the end of his destruction. Having determined that the precious and zealously guarded Mayan books he had been shown with great pride—precisely because of his evident empathy—contained “nothing in which there was not to be seen superstition and lies of the devil,” he ordered all of the books to be burned “…which [the Maya] regretted to an amazing degree and which caused them great affliction,” he wrote with what seems like genuine befuddlement. The Mayas under his jurisdiction complained bitterly to his superiors, who found his methods harsh and improper. Later that year Landa was remanded to Spain for trial.
That Landa was an acute and intelligent observer is evident from the opus on Mayan life and religion, Relación de las cosas de Yucatán (1566; “Report of the Affairs of Yucatán”), that he wrote in Spain during the time of his trial. It remains even in the 21st century a classic text on Mayan civilization. Although the original is now lost, a shortened copy of it was made in the 17th century. That copy was rediscovered in the 19th century by French missionary Charles-Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, who introduced and annotated it, translating it into French and publishing it in 1864. (It has since been translated into English by several individuals, initially as Yucatan Before and After the Conquest [1937, reprinted 1978] by William Gates.)
Landa was condemned in Spain by the Council of the Indies, which in 1543 had expressly forbidden Inquisitorial methods in New Spain. Later, however, an investigation by crown authorities exonerated Landa, and he was appointed bishop of Yucatán in 1572. He returned to his provincialate in 1573, continuing his fervent punishment of the backsliding people and his destruction of their ancient ways. He remained there until his death in 1579.
