Divination,  the practice of determining the hidden significance or cause of events, sometimes foretelling the future, by various natural, psychological, and other techniques. Found in all civilizations, both ancient and modern, it is encountered most frequently in contemporary mass society in the form of horoscopes, astrology, crystal gazing, tarot cards, and the Ouija board.
In the context of ancient Roman culture and belief, divination was concerned with discovering the will of the gods. Today, however, scholars no longer restrict the word to the root meaning. Divinatory practices and the beliefs undergirding them are greater in scope than discerning the will of the gods and the fatalistic view of the human condition that inspired so much of early Mediterranean religious thought. In some societies, in fact, divination is a practice to which many persons frequently resort, but never in terms of discovering the will of the gods. The idea of a godly providence controlling human affairs in such societies is unusual, although humbler spirits are often thought to intervene in troublesome ways. While divination is most commonly practiced in the modern Western world in the form of horoscopic astrology, other forms were and continue to be of equal importance for other cultures.
Divination is universally concerned with practical problems, private or public, and seeks information upon which practical decisions can be made; but the source of such information is not conceived as mundane, and the technique of getting it is necessarily fanciful. The mantic (divinatory) arts are many, and a broad understanding can emerge only from a survey of actual practices in various cultural settings. A short definition, however, may be offered as a preliminary guide: divination is the effort to gain information of a mundane sort by means conceived of as transcending the mundane.
Though the act of divination is attended by respect and the attitude of the participants in the divinatory act may be religious, the subject matter of divination (like that of magic) is ephemeral—e.g., an illness, a worrisome portent, a lost object. Divination is a consultative institution, and the matter posed to a diviner may range from a query about a few lost coins to high questions of state. The casual or solemn nature of the matter is normally matched by that of the diviner in terms of attitude, technique, and style. Where the diviner is a private practitioner, the elaborateness of the procedure may be reflected in the fee. In contrast to the worldly motives of some diviners, the calling of diviner-priest was seen by the ancient Etruscans in Italy and the Maya in Mexico as sacred; his concern was for the very destiny of his people. Divination has many rationales, and it is difficult to describe the diviner as a distinctive social type. He or she may be a shaman (private curer employing psychic techniques; see shamanism), a priest, a peddler of sorcery medicines, or a holy person who speaks almost with the voice of prophecy. To appreciate the significance of the diviner’s art in any culture or era, one must be familiar with prevailing beliefs about man and the world. In Christian times Europe has moved from a horror of necromancy (conceived not as consultation with a ghost but as a literal “raising of the dead”) to an amused tolerance (among the educated) of spiritualism as a sort of parlour game. To assert that European religious beliefs have remained the same throughout the Common Era would be to ignore the impact of modern science and secularization. On the other hand, to suppose that divination has been doomed by science and secularism would be to ignore the abiding popularity of astrology and recurrent fashions for other mantic disciplines—and perhaps to misjudge the security of “modern” beliefs.
The extent to which a practice such as divination should be called a corollary of the beliefs entailed and the extent to which the opposite might be true (i.e., the beliefs deriving from the practice as an after-the-fact explanation) is difficult to ascertain. Among the great cultures, the Chinese tradition has given the broadest scope to divination; yet there is no single Chinese religious cosmology, or theory on the ordering of the world, comparable to those of the Mayan, Sanskritic (Hindu), or Judeo-Christian traditions, from which the variety of popular practice can be seen to derive. Sometimes, as with the flourishing business of astrology in Christian countries since the Renaissance, the metaphysical (transcendent) presuppositions of mantic practice may have been muted in order to minimize conflict with official religious and scientific doctrines. Generally, however, the philosophical underpinnings of divination need not be deep or well worked out, but, where they are, they will afford clues to fundamental beliefs about man and about visible or invisible nature. Some traditions of divination—such as astrology, geomancy (divination by means of figures or lines), or the Chinese divinatory disciplines—are so old and established that it is virtually impossible to discover their original contexts. Over the centuries such practices have survived many changes and have become perennial attempts to answer recurring questions about the human condition.
Established long ago in the hieratic (priestly) discipline of primitive theocracies, such a tradition still bears the marks of the specialists who worked out its systematic techniques. Since the practice is now observed only as a folk or popular tradition, however, it would be rash to suppose that any legitimate philosophical tradition undergirding divination survives. Only in the case of the I ching, the Chinese “Classic of Changes,” have scholarly commentaries of any great intellectual substance accumulated over the millennia. Systematic studies of geomancy are recent, and the literature of astrology is as perishable as it is massive. Babylonian astrology, from which later forms are derived, arose in an agrarian Mesopotamian civilization concerned with the vicissitudes of nature and the affairs of state. The mercantile, seafaring, and individualistic Greeks absorbed the mantic system of the collectivistic floodplain civilization of Mesopotamia, elaborated on it by adding the horoscopic discipline, and transmitted it through Hellenistic, Egyptian, and Islamic science to Europe. In the course of this transformation, a two-way relationship between a society’s view of the world and its system may be seen. Various priests and scholars have made their contributions to the system; yet there also is a clear correspondence between the general character of a culture and the uses it finds for divination. That is, the worldview implicit in the divination system itself may reflect the historical rather than the current context of use. It requires only practical understanding to consult a Ouija board or use a forked stick to decide where to drill for water. Hence, people of very different beliefs may adopt the same practices, and a full correspondence between practice and belief can be expected only where both have developed in the same cultural context. Where much of the popularity of the mantic art derives from its “exotic” flavour, its symbolism may be little understood. By its very nature, however, divination tends to develop as a discipline, becoming the tradition of an organized body of specialists. This is because the means to which diviners must resort generally set them apart. That is the case even among such peoples as the Zande of the Nile-Congo divide in Africa, where the resort to divination is frequent and the most common techniques utilized are recognized to be within the competence of ordinary individuals. There, on a sensitive or contentious issue, an extraordinary credibility is desired, and the ultimate reliability of an oracle reflects the political standing of its owner—the king’s oracle, for example, is viewed as the final authority, and the royal court is scrupulously organized to guard this vessel of power (divinatory and other) from contamination. Few societies are as enthusiastically given to divination as the Zande, who routinely employ it to explore their thoughts and who will not consider any important undertakings without oracular confirmation in advance. Among the Zande, the ordinary person could be considered a divinatory specialist. Elsewhere, divination is reserved for special crises, and a recognized expert must be consulted to guarantee an authentic answer.
