Dome of the Rock, Arabic Qubbat al-Ṣakhrah,  shrine in Jerusalem built by the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān in the late 7th century ce. It is the oldest extant Islamic monument.
The structure is situated on a flat elevated plaza known to Muslims as al-Ḥaram al-Sharīf (“The Noble Sanctuary”) and to Jews as the Temple Mount (the site where the Temple of Jerusalem once stood). According to Muslims, the rock above which the dome is constructed is the spot from which the Prophet Muhammad was taken up into heaven for an encounter with God (an event known as the Miʿrāj). Nearby, on the southern extreme of the plaza, is Al-Aqṣā Mosque; Muslims believe the Prophet was miraculously transported there from Mecca on the night of his encounter (see Isrāʾ). The term “Al-Aqṣā Mosque” is commonly extended to denote the entire plaza and, consequently, to the Dome of the Rock itself.
The Dome of the Rock’s structure and ornamentation are rooted in the Byzantine architectural tradition, yet its construction in the 7th century represents an early stage in the emergence of a distinct Islamic visual style. The structure, positioned near the centre of a wide raised platform, comprises an octagonal base topped by a gilded wooden central dome. The dome, which is approximately 65 feet (20 metres) in diameter and is mounted on an elevated drum, rises above a circle of 16 piers and columns. Surrounding this circle is an octagonal arcade of 24 piers and columns. Below the dome a portion of the sacred rock is exposed and protected by a railing. A stairway leads to a natural cave beneath the surface of the rock. The outer walls also form an octagon, with each of the eight sides being approximately 60 feet (18 metres) wide and 36 feet (11 metres) high. Both the dome and the exterior walls contain many windows.
The interior and exterior of the structure are decorated with marble, mosaics, and metal plaques. Although the mosaics are similar in technique to those found in Byzantine public buildings and churches, the Dome of the Rock’s mosaics exclude any representations of human or animal forms, instead featuring Arabic script and vegetal patterns intermixed with images of items such as jewels and crowns. Arabic religious inscriptions run around the octagonal arcade.
The construction of the Dome of the Rock was a relatively late addition to Jerusalem’s solemnity, which had deep and long-standing religious significance prior to the advent of Islam. After David captured the city about 1000 bce and made it his capital, his son and successor Solomon built a Temple that became the most sacred centre of religious practice for the ancient Israelites. The Herodian reconstruction of that Temple was destroyed by the Romans in 70 ce and a Roman city (Aelia Capitolina) was erected in Jerusalem’s stead in 135.
After the conversion to Christianity of the Roman emperor Constantine I (the Great), the city experienced a renaissance. The Church of the Holy Sepulchre was built over the area traditionally held by Christians to be the site of Jesus’ death, burial, and resurrection from the dead. With imperial patronage, the city grew prosperous into the 7th century. By the time Jerusalem was captured in 638 by ʿUmar I, the second Muslim caliph, the city was adorned with splendid churches, monasteries, and hospices.
In the decades that followed Jerusalem’s capture, the nascent Islamic empire struggled with civil war and instability, especially with the rise of Umayyad dynastic rule. Emerging victorious from the second fitnah, which saw rebellion in Mecca, the resistance of non-Muslims to Muslim rule, and renewed conflict with the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire, the fifth Umayyad caliph, ʿAbd al-Malik, set out to centralize and reinforce his rule throughout the empire. The monumental construction of the Dome of the Rock, which stood prominently amid the city’s churches, was among his achievements. An inscription in the Dome of the Rock establishes the date of construction as ah 72 according to the Islamic calendar (691–692 ce), generally considered to indicate the date the structure was completed.
The original structural components of the Dome of the Rock have been preserved into modern times, but it has undergone modifications in decoration several times. The successive Islamic dynasties that ruled Jerusalem, including the Abbasids, the Fatimids, and the Ayyubids, each commissioned renovations of the structure and added their own inscriptions and ornamentations. During the Crusader kingdom of Jerusalem, the rock was surrounded with a wrought-iron screen to prevent Christian pilgrims from extracting relics from it. The Ayyubids replaced it with the wooden screen that surrounds the rock today. One significant restoration, ordered by the Ottoman sultan Süleyman I (the Magnificent) in the 16th century, replaced the exterior mosaics with coloured ceramic tiles. In the 20th century, damaged interior and exterior ornaments were repaired or replaced on the initiative of the Hashemite royals, and the dome was given a new gold covering.
Although the Dome of the Rock’s primary significance today lies in its connection to the Prophet Muhammad’s ascent to heaven, its inscriptions lack any reference to the episode. The earliest Islamic descriptions of al-Ḥaram al-Sharīf, recorded in the 9th century, mention some relevance between the compound and the Miʿrāj, but the association of the event with the Dome of the Rock did not start appearing as a preeminent theme until the 11th century.
The original function and significance of the Dome of the Rock are uncertain, partly because of the paucity of contemporary commentary about its construction. The architectural design differs from that of a mosque, and the ambulatory configuration is not suited for Muslim congregational prayer. It also does not fit easily into other categories of Islamic religious structures.
Several aspects of the Dome of the Rock suggest an attempt to situate Islam as the proper heir to the Abrahamic tradition. Its composition relates it to a class of Byzantine religious buildings known as martyria—typically circular or polygonal shrines erected to mark the graves of saints or to commemorate events of special religious significance. Of particular influence may have been the Kathisma of the Mother of God, a nearby octagonal martyrium whose remains were discovered in 1992. The Dome of the Rock’s grand scale and lavish decoration may have been intended to rival that of the Christian holy buildings of Jerusalem, especially the domed Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Its Arabic inscriptions, which present a selection of Qurʾānic passages and paraphrases, emphasize the unity of God (tawḥīd) and reject the Christian doctrines of the Trinity and the divinity of Jesus.
After the advent of the Abbasid dynasty in the 8th century, some commentators began to report that ʿAbd al-Malik built the Dome of the Rock as a substitute for the Kaaba in an attempt to relocate the site of the Muslim hajj from Mecca, then under the control of rebels led by Ibn al-Zubayr, to Jerusalem. Modern scholars have questioned this interpretation, citing the strong anti-Umayyad bias of Abbasid historiography as well as evidence that Mecca remained the destination of the hajj throughout Ibn al-Zubayr’s revolt.
Other scholars have posited an eschatological motive for the builders of the Dome of the Rock, arguing that its placement, architecture, and decorative motifs correspond to images associated with Islamic and Byzantine beliefs about Judgment Day and heaven.
The site has held religious significance outside of Islam as well. Located on the Temple Mount, where the Temple of Jerusalem had previously stood, the site has particular significance for Judaism. The Foundation Stone, on which Jews believe the world was created, is thought to be located within the compound and is usually identified with the rock beneath the dome. In the Middle Ages, Christians and Jews identified the Dome of the Rock with the Temple of Solomon (Templum Domini); its image was iconographically employed in both artwork and ritual objects to represent the Temple. The Knights Templar were quartered there following the conquest of Jerusalem by a Crusader army in 1099, and Templar churches in Europe imitated its design. The Dome of the Rock was used as a church by the Crusaders until the Muslim Ayyubids, led by Saladin, captured Jerusalem in 1187.
