Druze, also spelled Druse, Arabic plural Durūz, singular Darazi,  small Middle Eastern religious sect characterized by an eclectic system of doctrines and by a cohesion and loyalty among its members (at times politically significant) that have enabled them to maintain for centuries their close-knit identity and distinctive faith. The Druze numbered more than 1,000,000 in the early 21st century and live mostly in Lebanon, Syria, and Israel, with smaller communities in other countries. They call themselves muwaḥḥidūn (“unitarians”).
The Druze faith originated in Egypt as an offshoot of Ismaʿīlī Shīʿism when, during the reign of the sixth Fāṭimid caliph, the eccentric al-Ḥākim bi-Amr Allāh (ruled 996–1021), some Ismaʿīlī theologians began to organize a movement proclaiming al-Ḥākim a divine figure. Although the idea was probably encouraged by al-Ḥākim himself, it was condemned as heresy by the Fāṭimid religious establishment, which held that al-Ḥākim and his predecessors were divinely appointed but not themselves divine. In 1017 the doctrine was publicly preached for the first time, causing riots in Cairo.
There was also conflict within the emerging movement as the leading proponent of the doctrine of al-Ḥākim’s divinity, Ḥamzah ibn ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad al-Zūzanī, found himself competing for authority and followers with a former disciple, Muḥammad al-Darāzī. Ḥamzah seems to have been favoured by al-Ḥākim, however, and al-Darāzī was declared an apostate within the movement and later disappeared (it is believed that al-Ḥākim ordered him killed). In spite of al-Darāzī’s death, outsiders continued to attach his name to the movement as al-Darāziyyah and al-Durūz.
Al-Ḥākim disappeared mysteriously in 1021, and the movement was persecuted under his successor, al-Zāḥir. Ḥamzah went into hiding, leaving the Druze to be led by al-Muqtanā Bahāʾ al-Dīn (also called al-Samūqī), with whom he seems to have remained in contact for a period of time. The Druze faith gradually died out in Egypt but survived in isolated areas of Syria and Lebanon, where missionaries had established significant communities. Al-Muqtanā withdrew from public life in 1037 but continued to write pastoral letters elaborating Druze doctrine until 1043. At that point, proselytism ended, and the Druze ceased to recognize conversions to the faith.
The Druze still do not permit conversion, either away from or to their religion. Marriage outside the Druze faith is rare and is strongly discouraged. Many Druze religious practices are kept secret, even from the community as a whole. Only an elite of initiates, known as ʿuqqāl (“knowers”), participate fully in their religious services and have access to the secret teachings of the scriptures, Al-Ḥikmah al-Sharīfah.
Despite the small size of their community, the Druze have figured prominently in Middle Eastern history. During the Crusades, Druze soldiers aided the Ayyūbid and later Mamlūk forces by resisting Crusader advances at the Lebanese coast. The Druze enjoyed considerable autonomy under the Ottoman Empire and often rebelled against it, protected from direct Ottoman control by the mountainous terrain of their homelands. From the 16th to the 19th century, a series of powerful feudal lords dominated Druze political life. One of the most famous of them was the 17th-century ruler Fakhr al-Dīn II of the house of Maʿn, who forged a coalition with the Maronite Christians of the Lebanon Mountains and challenged Ottoman authority by allying with Tuscany.
The largest concentration of Druze in the present day is in Lebanon. The communities are located along the western edges of the Lebanon Mountains as well as in the southeastern portion of the country, and the total Druze population numbers well over 300,000. The Druze have wielded significant political power in the country since its independence. Kamal Jumblatt, a prominent Druze leader, enjoyed broad appeal through his charisma. His opposition to Camille Chamoun, including instigating an uprising against him in 1958, also helped earn him widespread respect among Arab nationalists. Jumblatt was given several cabinet posts throughout his political career; he was appointed minister of the interior because his pull with various communities put him in a unique position to manage the internal affairs of the country.
After Jumblatt’s assassination in 1977, his son Walid took over the political leadership of the Druze community in Lebanon. Like his father, he was often placed in the position of kingmaker in the country. His opposition to Syrian interference in Lebanon tended to give him a markedly pro-Western orientation. In 2011, however, he backed the pro-Syrian Hezbollah in Lebanon’s political crisis. In so doing, he indicated his dedication for Arab unity over either pro-Western or pro-Syrian orientations.
Competing with the Jumblatts in leadership of the Druze has been the Arslan family, often found on the opposite side of Lebanese politics. Majid Arslan, who served as minister of defense under Camille Chamoun, was the rival of Kamal Jumblatt. Moreover, unlike the Jumblatts, the Arslans have enjoyed strong relations with Syria. Nonetheless, despite their rivalry, the two families have at times put their differences aside and formed alliances to protect their common interests.
While Lebanon has the largest concentration of Druze, the much larger country of Syria has the largest total population of Druze—more than 600,000. Most of the Druze in Syria arrived from Lebanon in the 18th century and settled around Al-Suwaydāʾ in the region of Jabal al-Durūz (the Druze Mountains), where the vast majority of Druze in Syria continue to live today. In 1925 Druze leader Sulṭān al-Aṭrash led a revolt against French rule. After local success, Syrian nationalists outside the Druze community joined the revolt, and the rebellion spread throughout the region and into Damascus before it was suppressed in 1927. Among Syrians, this revolt is remembered as the nation’s first nationalist uprising.
The Druze remained politically salient figures for decades to come. Another Druze revolt led to a national uprising and the overthrow of Pres. Adib al-Shishakli in 1954. Moreover, the son of Sulṭān al-Aṭrash, Manṣūr al-Aṭrash, became one of the founding members of the Syrian Baʿth Party. He later served briefly as a parliamentary speaker in 1965 until his arrest in 1966.
Israel also has a sizeable community of Druze—about 150,000, located entirely in the northern portions of the country. The Druze are unique among the Arab communities in Israel, known for their loyalty to the state. After the Sunni leadership in Jerusalem threatened in 1942 to take control of the tomb of Jethro (called Shuʿayb by the Druze) in Tiberias, the Druze sided with Jewish forces in the 1948 war. Druze soldiers have since fought for Israel in every Arab-Israeli war. They are the only Arab group conscripted into the Israel Defense Forces, and they participate in Israel’s border security and diplomatic corps. In July 2018, when the Israeli Knesset enacted a law with constitutional weight that enshrined Israel as a Jewish state, the Druze led the backlash; they claimed the law made them second-class citizens and was a betrayal to their dedication and service to the country.
