Ernesto Cardenal,  (born January 20, 1925, Granada, Nicaragua—died March 1, 2020, Managua), revolutionary Nicaraguan poet and Roman Catholic priest who is considered to be the second most important Nicaraguan poet, after Rubén Darío.
He was educated first at Jesuit schools in Nicaragua, then in Mexico and at Columbia University. Having undergone a religious conversion, in 1957 he entered the Trappist monastery at Gethsemane, Kentucky, transferred to the Benedictine monastery of Cuernavaca, Mexico, and, after studying theology in a seminary at La Ceja, Colombia, was ordained a priest in 1965 in Nicaragua.
His early poems, collected in Epigramas (1961), denounce the senseless violence of the Somoza regime in Nicaragua, while others are love poems written with a fine sense of irony. La hora 0 (1960; Zero Hour, and Other Documentary Poems), a long documentary poem denouncing the effects of domestic tyranny and American imperialism in Central American history, is a masterpiece of protest poetry. In subsequent works Cardenal began to use empty phrases and commercial slogans as symbols of an alienating world.
The poems in Salmos (1964; The Psalms of Struggle and Liberation) represent Cardenal’s rewriting of the biblical psalms of David and condemn modern-day evils. These poems, like many of his others, express the tension between his revolutionary political fervour and his religious faith. The book culminates in an apocalyptic view of the world, a theme that becomes an obsession in later works.
In Oración por Marilyn Monroe, y otros poemas (1965; Prayer for Marilyn Monroe, and Other Poems), the earlier prophetic tone is linked to contemporary events: the death of the film actress Marilyn Monroe serves as an example of what Cardenal sees as the dehumanizing corruption of the capitalist system. Clichés, slogans, newspaper clippings, and advertisements in the poem become symbols of noncommunication.
Among his other volumes of poetry is El estrecho dudoso (1966; “The Doubtful Strait”). Homenaje a los indios americanos (1969; Homage to the American Indians), and Oráculo sobre Managua (1973; “Oracles About Managua”). Vida en el amor (1970; To Live Is to Love), a book of philosophical essays, and En Cuba (1972; In Cuba), recollections of his visit there in 1970, constitute his prose work. Volumes of his poetry have been translated into all the major European languages.
Cardenal took an active part in the Sandinista revolution that ousted Anastasio Somoza in July 1979, and he became minister of culture in the new government. In this post he sponsored popular workshops in poetry and theatre and promulgated Sandinista political ideals. In 1985 Pope John Paul II suspended Cardenal and several other priests from active ministry for their participation in the Marxist-influenced Sandinista government and, ostensibly, for their support of liberation theology. Cardenal resigned from the Sandinista Front in 1994.
His later works of poetry included Nueva Antología poética (1978), Vuelos de victoria (1985; Flights of Victory), Cántico cósmico (1989; Cosmic Canticles), Pluriverse: New and Selected Poems (2009), and El Origen de las Especies, y Otros Poemas (2011; Origin of the Species, and Other Poems). He won numerous awards and honours.
In 2019 Pope Francis lifted the canonical sanctions against the ailing Cardenal, effectively reinstating him as an active priest.
