eschatology,  the doctrine of the last things. It was originally a Western term, referring to Jewish, Christian, and Muslim beliefs about the end of history, the resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment, the messianic era, and the problem of theodicy (the vindication of God’s justice). Historians of religion have applied the term to similar themes and concepts in the religions of nonliterate peoples, ancient Mediterranean and Middle Eastern cultures, and Eastern civilizations. Eschatological archetypes also can be found in various secular liberation movements.
In the history of religion, the term eschatology refers to conceptions of the last things: immortality of the soul, rebirth, resurrection, migration of the soul, and the end of time. These concepts also have secular parallels—for example, in the turning points of one’s life and in one’s understanding of death. Often these notions are contrasted with the experience of suffering in the world. Eschatological themes thrive during crises, serving as consolation for those who hope for a better world or as motivation for a revolutionary transformation of society.
Shaped by the extent and nature of the believer’s involvement in the world, eschatological expectations assume either an individual or a collective form, embracing individual souls, a people or group, humanity, or the whole cosmos. The social implications of the two forms of eschatology are significant. Individual forms tend to foster either apolitical or politically conservative attitudes—predicated on the belief that each person experiences God’s judgment upon death and that there is therefore little purpose to changing the world. Some forms of collective eschatology, however, involve political activism and the expectation of the public manifestation of God’s justice. Not only do they hope for collective corporeal salvation and a transformation of the world, but they actively prepare for it.
Because the origins of biblical eschatology are found in unique “historical” events (such as the Exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt in the 13th century bce), difficulties occur when eschatological concepts are imposed on the framework of other religions. In religions outside the biblical tradition, there is no “end” but rather a cyclic pattern of cosmic destruction and rebirth. Therefore, a distinction must be made between mythical and historical eschatologies. The former interprets the human condition in relation to the realm of the sacred and the profane as defined in nontemporal terms and stories, the latter in temporal terms and stories.
In mythical eschatology the origin of the world is reproduced at the end of the world; that is, the process of creating order out of chaos that occurred at the beginning of time occurs again at the end of time (the “End” or “Endtime”). In the beginning, according to this approach, universal laws and the pure order of things are established, but eventually law and order decay and degenerate. Salvation, therefore, is found in a return of the world’s origin. Both the mythical actions of the gods and historical actions of humans are seen as representations of an eternal struggle in which the world order is defended against chaos. History thus becomes a cultic drama in which priests and kings play out preordained ritual roles.
Mythical eschatology, then, can be defined in terms of the “myth of the eternal return,” which posits a cyclic view of history. In religious festivals, the lost time of history is regenerated and eternity is represented. Through the ritualistic repetition of the creation of the cosmos, the impression of transience is proved wrong. Everything is shown to remain in place, hope is inherent in memory, and future salvation is depicted as a return to the primordial origin or to an original golden age. In mythical eschatology, the meaning of history is found in a celebration of the eternity of the cosmos and the repeatability of the origin of the world.
Historical eschatology, on the contrary, is grounded not in a mythical primal happening but in events in time that provide the structure of history and are essential to its progress. Biblical and biblically influenced eschatologies are historical and directed toward the historical future. In this view, experiences are never universal. Rituals such as Passover and seder are not attempts to repeat events and experiences but are ways to remember them through the telling of history and tradition. Rituals are events in which a novum (a new or extraordinary event or action) is symbolically experienced. Hope is thus grounded in historical remembrance but transcends what is remembered historically.
The future of history is final because history is unrepeateable. Understood in this context, history is not the arena of the horrors of chaos but the field of danger and salvation. The meaning of history is thus found in its future fulfillment. The divine, or sacred, is not experienced in the ritualistic reenactments of the eternally recurring order of nature and the cosmos; rather, God’s freedom of action, faithfulness, and promises for the future can be discerned in the irreversible events of history.
Historical eschatologies are found in the faith of Israel and Judaism, which is grounded in the Exodus and which has focused increasingly on the expected revelation of the glory of God in all lands. Historical eschatologies are also found in Christianity, which is based on the life of Jesus and his Resurrection from the dead. Christian hopes focus on the kingdom of God, through which history is to end and be fulfilled. In Judaism and Christianity the unique occurrence of a historical event serves as a basis for belief in a long-desired future. A historically occurring novum offers hope for a new existence that will be more than the reproduction of the primordial condition.
Historical eschatology appears in one of three distinct forms— messianism, millennialism, or apocalypticism. Messianic hopes are directed toward a single redemptive figure who, it is believed, will lead the people of God, now suffering and oppressed, into a better historical future. Messianism sometimes promotes visions of the vengeance and justice that befall tyrannical political and religious leaders. In these instances, local historical expectations shape the belief in the fulfillment of history before its end. Apocalypticism, on the other hand, promises a sudden, cataclysmic intervention by God on the side of a faithful minority. According to this view, "this world," unable to bear the "justice of God," will be destroyed and replaced by a new world founded on God’s righteousness. Millenarian, or chiliastic, hope is directed toward the 1,000-year earthly kingdom of peace, fellowship, and prosperity over which Christ and his saints will reign following the destruction of the forces of evil and before the final end of history.
