Eugen Drewermann,  (born June 20, 1940, Bergkamen, Ger.), German theologian, psychotherapist, and Roman Catholic priest whose innovations in points of Catholic dogma led to his suspension from the priesthood and his eventual withdrawal from the church.
Drewermann studied philosophy at the University of Münster, theology in Paderborn, and neopsychoanalysis in Tiefenbrunn, not formally completing a degree in the latter. Drewermann’s highly esteemed three-volume doctoral and habilitation thesis, Structures of Evil (1976–78), combined the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard, current psychoanalytic knowledge, and biblical exegesis, laying the foundation for his later works. He went on to teach Catholic dogmatics at the Faculty of Theology in Paderborn.
Drewermann held that anthropocentrism, rationality, and morality must be understood in less-absolute terms and that repression of sexuality must be overcome. At the same time, he described the possibilities of a properly understood religiousness that calms human aggressiveness, “spiritualizes” conflicts, and is able to pacify the alienated unconscious mind. He felt that only when people have learned to be in harmony with themselves will they be able to fulfill moral requirements. Advocating more tolerance, Drewermann stated in an interview that religions are “like medicines for particular illnesses, and not every medicine is suitable for every illness.”
Drewermann’s first conflict with the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy occurred in 1983, when he criticized what he perceived as its anthropocentrism regarding the natural environment—its tendency to conceive the value of the environment in terms of human interests. He was subsequently barred from offering courses for teachers of religious education. In 1986 the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith addressed the archbishop of Paderborn, Johann Joachim Degenhardt, concerning Drewermann; as a consequence, the German Bishops’ Conference prepared a dossier on him in 1987–88. The main accusations against Drewermann were that he denied the historicity of revelation, that he disputed the fundamental doctrine that Jesus was the son of God, and that he doubted the human need for redemption. In 1991 the archbishop of Paderborn withdrew Drewermann’s right to teach religion. He was, however, explicitly allowed to continue his activities as priest and to publish. Most probably as a result of an interview that appeared in the news magazine Der Spiegel later that year, Archbishop Degenhardt withdrew Drewermann’s right to preach. He was suspended from priestly office shortly thereafter. Drewermann announced in 2005 that he had formally withdrawn from the Roman Catholic Church.
