Eugenius Bulgaris,  (born Aug. 10/11, 1716, Corfu, Greece—died probably June 10, 1806, St. Petersburg, Russia), Greek Orthodox theologian and liberal arts scholar who disseminated Western thought throughout the Eastern Orthodox world and contributed to the development of Modern Greek language and literature.
Having studied philosophy and theology at the University of Padua, Italy, a centre of Greek culture, Bulgaris taught at an academy in Ioánnina, Greece. After becoming a monk in 1749 at the Vatopedion monastery on Mt. Athos, the centre of Greek Orthodox asceticism, he resumed teaching, first at the monastic school, then at the patriarchal academy of Constantinople. Dismissed from the faculty because of doctrinal and methodological innovations, he moved to Leipzig, Ger., where his learning won the admiration of Frederick II the Great, king of Prussia, who then recommended him to the empress Catherine II of Russia. Appointed librarian and scholar in residence at St. Petersburg, Bulgaris took holy orders and in 1776 was named bishop of Kherson in the Ukraine. Because of his literary work he found it necessary to renounce his pastoral responsibilities in 1779 and retired to the monastery of St. Alexander Nevsky near Novgorod.
Esteemed for his Modern Greek translations and revisions of classical literature, Bulgaris also wrote many Greek treatises in philosophy, the sciences, and theology. His Dogmatic Theology (c. 1800) was the first Greek compendium on philosophical theology since the 14th century. Prominent also was his Treatise on Tolerance, written at Leipzig in 1768 to refute the right assumed by Russian ecclesiastical and civil authorities to compel the largely Roman Catholic Poles to conform to the national religion.
Bulgaris did, however, dispute Roman Catholic and Protestant tenets in his Orthodox Confession (1767) and in History of the Christian Church in the First Century (1805). Other works include tracts on logic, metaphysics, and astronomy. A major historical contribution was Bulgaris’ edition of the influential 15th-century anti-Roman Catholic tracts by the Greek Orthodox Joseph Bryennios.
