Euthymius Zigabenus,  Zigabenus also spelled Zigadenus, or Zygadenus,  (flourished  12th century—died  after 1118, near Constantinople), Byzantine theologian, polemicist for Greek Orthodoxy, and biblical exegete whose encyclopaedic work on the history of Christian heresies is a primary source for material on early and medieval theological controversy.
Zigabenus was a monk at a convent near Constantinople. He shared with the Byzantine emperor Alexius I Comnenus (reigned 1081–1118) a common interest in conservative Orthodoxy and theological dispute. The two joined in repressing the dualistic Bogomil sect, a heresy holding the coexistence with God of a principle of evil that participated in creation. Emperor Alexius commissioned Zigabenus to write a comprehensive work against heresies, with the title Panoplia dogmatikē tēs orthodoxou pisteōs (“The Doctrinal Armory of the Orthodox Faith”). The work has two sections. The first treats heterodox teaching in the primitive church, particularly concerning Christian Trinitarian (God as one nature in three persons) and Christological doctrine (Christ as human and divine natures joined in one person). The second covers doctrinal polemics from the refutation of Jewish criticisms to contentions with Zigabenus’ contemporaries, including disputes with Roman theologians on the Holy Spirit. Despite some exaggerations, “The Doctrinal Armory” is valuable for knowledge of the Bogomils, being the principal documentary source for this sect and for the church synods judging the heresy.
Zigabenus’ exegetical works include commentaries on the Psalms, on the four Gospels, and on the Letters attributed to St. Paul of Tarsus. He uses chiefly patristic sources, especially St. John Chrysostom, and reflects the literal–historical interpretations of the theological school of Antioch, although he makes some use of mystical allegory. Other works in published collections of his writings, including “The Exposition of the Nicene-Constantinople Creed” and “Dialogue with a Muslim,” are not genuine. Zigabenus’ writings appear in Patrologia Graeca, ed. J.-P. Migne, vol. 128–131 (1857–66).
