Evangelical Lutheran Church of Denmark, Danish Evangelisk-Luthereske Folkekirke I Danmark,  the established, state-supported church in Denmark. Lutheranism was established in Denmark during the Protestant Reformation.
Christianity was introduced to Denmark in the 9th century by St. Ansgar, bishop of Hamburg. In the 10th century, King Harald Bluetooth became a Christian and began organizing the church, and by the 11th century, Christianity was gradually becoming accepted throughout the country.
In the late Middle Ages the church had become worldly and offered little spiritual leadership. King Christian II (reigned 1513–23) attempted to reform the church, but the Reformation was brought to Denmark by King Christian III (reigned 1536–59), who had known Martin Luther and had become a Lutheran. After winning a civil war, Christian III decreed in 1536 that Denmark would be Lutheran. Roman Catholic bishops and clergy who objected were imprisoned or deposed, and the church’s property was confiscated by the government. Johannes Bugenhagen, Lutheran reformer and theologian at Wittenberg, Ger., came to Copenhagen in 1537 to help organize the Lutheran Church of Denmark. In 1683 King Christian V decreed that the law of Denmark would recognize the Apostles’, Nicene, and Athanasian creeds, Luther’s Small Catechism, and the Augsburg Confession as the authoritative confessions of the Danish church.
German Lutheran orthodoxy influenced Danish Lutheranism in the 16th and 17th centuries. In the 18th century the church was influenced by Pietism, the Lutheran movement that began in Germany and encouraged personal religious experience and reform. As a result, missions, orphanages, and schools were established in Denmark. In the 19th century the outstanding figure in the renewal of Danish church life was N.F.S. Grundtvig.
Although the king and Parliament have legal control over the Danish church, in practice the church enjoys considerable independence. It is divided into dioceses, each headed by a bishop. The bishop of Copenhagen also supervises the Lutheran churches in Greenland, which is part of the Danish kingdom. Women were given the right to seek ordination in 1947.
Under the Danish constitution the Evangelical Lutheran Church is the state church, and instruction in Lutheran beliefs is given in schools. As in all Scandinavian countries, the church’s official membership includes most of the population, though only a small percentage of the people are active participants.
