Evangelical and Reformed Church,   Protestant church in the United States, organized in 1934 by uniting the Reformed Church in the United States and the Evangelical Synod of North America. The church brought together churches of Reformed and Lutheran background. It accepted the Heidelberg Catechism (Reformed), Luther’s Catechism, and the Augsburg Confession (Lutheran) as its doctrinal standards, but, when these differed, the Bible was the final rule of faith. In 1957 the Evangelical and Reformed Church merged with the General Council of Congregational Christian Churches to form the United Church of Christ. Membership at that time was about 800,000. The merger was unusual because of the presbyterian form of government of the Evangelical and Reformed Church and the congregational form of the larger body.
The Reformed Church in the United States developed from congregations founded in the 18th century by settlers in Pennsylvania who came from western Germany and Switzerland. For several years these congregations were supervised by the Reformed Church of the Netherlands, which sent several ministers to Pennsylvania. The church established itself as an independent church at its first synod meeting, held in Lancaster, Pa., in 1793. It adopted the Heidelberg Catechism as its doctrinal standard. When it merged into the Evangelical and Reformed Church in 1934, it had about 350,000 members.
The Evangelical Synod of North America was founded by six German ministers in 1840 at Gravois Settlement, near St. Louis, Mo. Known in its early years as the Evangelical Union of the West, it changed its name to German Evangelical Synod of North America in 1877, and in 1925 dropped the word German from its name. Some early ministers were from the Evangelical church of Prussia, a union of Lutheran and Reformed churches that gave support to the American church. The Evangelical Synod of North America accepted the Heidelberg Catechism, Luther’s Catechism, and the Augsburg Confession as its doctrinal standards. Four other church groups of German background subsequently joined the Evangelical Synod. When it merged into the Evangelical and Reformed Church in 1934, it had 281,598 members.
