Faustus Socinus, Italian Fausto (Paolo) Socini, Sozini, or Sozzini,  (born Dec. 5, 1539, Siena [Italy]—died March 3, 1604, Luclawice, Pol.), theologian whose anti-Trinitarian theology was later influential in the development of Unitarian theology.
A nephew of the anti-Trinitarian theologian Laelius Socinus, Faustus had no systematic education but early began to reject orthodox Roman Catholic religious doctrines. He was denounced by the Inquisition in 1559 and sought refuge until 1562 in Zürich, where he acquired his uncle Laelius’ papers, which are considered a major source of his beliefs.
His first published work was an interpretation of the prologue of the Gospel According to John, in which he wrote of Christ as divine by office rather than by nature. In 1563 he returned to Italy and became a secretary at the Florentine court, where he lived in outward conformity to the Roman Catholic church for 12 years. After three more years spent at Basel in the study of Scripture, he wrote De Jesu Christo servatore (completed 1578, published 1594), his most important work.
Traveling to Transylvania, Socinus tried unsuccessfully (1578–79) to dissuade the Unitarian bishop Ferenc Dávid from his controversial renunciation of the worship of Christ. Socinus then settled at Kraków, Pol., where he attained a dominant influence in the Minor Reformed Church (Polish Brethren), centred at the colony of Racow. He became its leader and eventually set his stamp upon its theology.
Central to Socinus’ teaching was the attainment of eternal life through the study of divinely revealed Scripture. He saw Christ as fully human, though without sin, who by his suffering taught humans how to bear their own sufferings. In his view, faith is more than the belief that the teaching of Christ is true; it also results in repentance for sins and in an obedience that leads to eternal life.
From 1587 to 1598 Socinus lived in Kraków, but in the latter year an enraged mob tried to take his life, and he took refuge at the neighbouring village of Luclawice, where he spent his last years. His incomplete work Christianae religionis institutio is possibly the basis for the Racovian Catechism (1605), a thorough exposition of Socinian thought.
Subsequent Unitarian theology, particularly in the doctrines of the person and work of Christ, was influenced considerably by the introduction of Socinian writings into England during the 17th century.
