Finno-Ugric religion,  pre-Christian and pre-Islamic religious beliefs and practices of the Finno-Ugric peoples, who inhabit regions of northern Scandinavia, Siberia, the Baltic area, and central Europe. In modern times the religion of many of these peoples has been an admixture of agrarian and nomadic primitive beliefs and of Christianity and Islam.
The area inhabited by the Finno-Ugric peoples is extensive: from Norway to the region of the Ob River in Siberia and southward into the Carpathian Basin in central Europe and Ukraine. The history of their geographic dispersion is based almost entirely on linguistic criteria, since historical knowledge is recent and archaeological finds are scanty and interpreted variously.
The Finno-Ugric languages and the Samoyed languages together form the Uralic family of languages, which began to split up about 5000–4000 bce. The original Uralic people are thought to have lived in the region between the Ural Mountains and the middle reaches of the Volga River. Their descendants in the north are the Nenets, who live on the shores of the Arctic Ocean between the Taymyr and Kanin peninsulas. In the south the original speakers of the parent Finno-Ugric language probably began to disperse by 3000 bce, when the Ugrians formed their own group. One branch moved northeast, behind the Ural Mountains: the Khanty, living east of the Ob River, and the Mansi, living west of the Ob River. The other branch spread southward and made contact with the Bulgar Turks and the Khazars. In 895 this branch (the Magyars [Hungarians]), together with certain Turkish tribes, conquered what is now Hungary. In this way, the largest, but at the same time linguistically the most isolated, Finno-Ugric nation came into existence. Other Magyars live in Romania and Slovakia.
The Permian branch of the Finno-Ugric populations living in central Russia split from the other groups between 2500 and 2000 bce. The linguistic differentiation is not very great between the present-day Permians, who are divided into Udmurts (living between the Kama and Vyatka rivers) and Komi (also called Zyryan, living in the region between the upper reaches of the Western Dvina River, Kama, and Pechora); the differentiation occurred only a little over 1,000 years ago. An intermediary group between the two branches is the Permyaks, whose language is sometimes considered a dialect of Komi.
Farther to the south, the differentiation of the Volga Finns into separate groups probably began about 1200 bce. The Volga Finns consist today of the Mordvins (including the Moksha in the southeast and the Erzya in the northwest), living in a rather large region near the middle reaches of the Volga River, and the Cheremis (the Mari), living in the vicinity of the confluence of the Volga and the Kama.
When the Baltic Finns came to the regions bordering the Baltic Sea is not certain. The latest possible date would be about 1500 bce (the evidence being the Baltic loanwords in proto-Finnic), when the “proto-Finns” still maintained contact with the Mordvins and the Sami. A much earlier date is possible, however, as there must have been many and repeated migrations by the Finno-Ugric populations westward from the Ural Mountains toward the Baltic regions. Initially, settlement was sparse, as is always the case with hunting cultures, but language differentiation sped up with the change to sedentary agriculture. The Sami have been the slowest of the Finno-Ugric peoples to relinquish the hunting and nomadic culture—which has withdrawn slowly toward the north—and they themselves have moved from the direction of Lakes Ladoga and Onega (northeast of St. Petersburg) to the northern parts of Fennoscandia and the Kola Peninsula (far northern Russia).
After separating from early proto-Finnic about 3,000 years ago, the Sami language became divided into a number of very different dialects. The oldest population settlements of the Baltic Finns were to the south of the Gulf of Finland and to the south of Lake Ladoga. The most westerly group, the Livonians (in the north of Courland, now part of Latvia), is disappearing. The Estonians are one of the three most advanced of the Finno-Ugric peoples, the others being the Finns and the Hungarians. Small but interesting cultures are represented by the Greek Orthodox Votes and Izhora Ingrians, both nearly extinct groups living near the head of the Gulf of Finland in an area once called Ingria, the Veps (living near Lake Onega), and the Karelians (living in central Russia, Karelia, and Finland), as well as the Ludes in Olonets, who speak a transition dialect. The population moved into Finland from the south and southeast.
