First-fruits ceremony,  ceremony centered on the concept that the first fruits of a harvest belong to or are sanctified unto God (or gods).
Although the title signals that first-fruit offerings often are of agricultural produce, other types of offerings are also included under this heading. For instance, in the religions of some native northwest American tribes, there exists the belief that salmon were supernatural beings who voluntarily assumed piscine form to sacrifice themselves annually for the benefit of mankind. On being taken, the spirits of the fish returned to their home beneath the sea, where they were reincarnated if their bones were returned to the water. If offended, however, the salmon-beings would refuse to return to the river. Hence, there were numerous specific prohibitions on acts believed to offend them and observances designed to propitiate them.
The most characteristic motivation behind a first-fruits offering is the belief that, since all good things come from the divine, then a portion of those good things should be offered back to the divinity. Innumerable examples of such rites exist in the historical record. The ancient Greek Thargelia festival, one of the primary rites dedicated to Apollo at Athens, was a vegetation ritual named after the first bread baked from the newly harvested wheat. Similarly, in modern Sri Lanka at harvest time the Buddha is ceremonially offered a large bowl of milk and rice, while in Shintō the first rice sheaves of the harvest are presented as offerings (shinsen) to the kami (god or sacred power) during agricultural and other festivals.
In Judaism, the first-fruits ceremony is known as Shavuot. The belief is that fruit trees live their own life and are to remain untrimmed for three years after they are planted. But even then their fruits cannot be enjoyed until God is given his share. Within classical Judaism, the idea of the first-fruits offering formed the center of sacrifice as a whole. The rationale for sacrifice is that everything belongs to God; the central point in the sacrifice was the sanctification of the offering, and the surrender of it to God. Its most immediate purpose was to serve as a form of taxation to the priests, since only they were considered holy enough to take possession of the offering following the rite. (See also pidyon ha-ben.)
The belief that all good things come from God, including the fertility of the fields, is widespread, and consequently first-fruit offerings are also a ubiquitous feature of the world’s religions. Particularly if such offerings are taken as a characteristic form of sacrifice, the first-fruits ceremony may be seen as a category of fundamental importance to the study of religious ritual. (See also Kwanzaa.)
