François de Montmorency Laval,   (born April 30, 1623, Montigny-sur-Avre, Fr.—died  May 6, 1708, Quebec), the first Roman Catholic bishop in Canada, who laid the foundations of church organization in France’s North American possessions.
Born into one of the greatest families of France, Laval was ordained priest in 1647. After taking a degree in canon law at the Sorbonne, he was named archdeacon of the diocese of Évreux. He later resigned that post, however, and lived (1654–58) at the Ermitage of Caen, a spiritual school under the direction of Jean de Bernières.
In June 1658 Laval was made a bishop and vicar apostolic of New France, and a year later he took up residence in Quebec. A man of great vision and strong character, Laval was quarrelsome by nature and became involved in frequent conflicts with the civil authorities of the colony. His staunch opposition to liquor sales to the Indians brought him into conflict with the governor, Baron d’Avaugour, in 1662. Laval departed for France in August and succeeded in bringing about d’Avaugour’s recall the following year.
Laval returned to Quebec in 1663 and in that year founded the Seminary of Quebec, which was intended to be both a training school for priests and a home for retired priests. It was not long, however, before he quarrelled also with the new governor, who, in 1664, removed from the Sovereign Council four men who were protégés of Laval.
Laval’s political power declined somewhat with the arrival of the new intendant (royal agent) Jean-Baptiste Talon, who had instructions to make certain that the authority of the clergy be subordinated to that of the civil government. Yet, in spiritual matters, Laval’s authority remained preeminent. In 1674 he was made bishop of Quebec. The newly created diocese of Quebec, which included all French territory in North America, was placed under the direct supervision of Rome.
In 1684 Laval, suffering from ill health, left Quebec and presented his resignation to the court, which reluctantly accepted it. Although he technically continued in office for several more years, his destined successor, Monsignor de Saint-Vallier, took office in Quebec in 1685 with the title of vicar general. Upon Laval’s official resignation in 1688, Saint-Vallier succeeded him. Laval resided at the Seminary of Quebec until his death.
In 1852 the Seminary was named after its founder, becoming Laval University. His cause of canonization was introduced in 1878; the decree stating that Laval was a man of saintly virtues was promulgated by Pope John XXIII in 1960.
