Fred Luter, Jr.,  (born November 11, 1956, New Orleans, Louisiana, U.S.), American Protestant religious leader and president of the Southern Baptist Convention (2012–14), the first African American to hold the position.
Luter was born in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans. He narrowly survived a motorcycle accident when he was 21 years old, an event that spurred a spiritual reevaluation. He began preaching on a street corner soon after his recovery; within a few short years he was preaching in Baptist churches in New Orleans, quickly building a reputation throughout the city. In 1986 he became pastor of Franklin Avenue Baptist Church (FABC), a formerly large white church in the Ninth Ward that had become a mainly black congregation of fewer than 100 worshipers. Pursuing an evangelization strategy that he called “FRANgelism” (FRAN was an acronym for “friends, relatives, associates, neighbours”), Luter built a network of parishioners and converts who encouraged their relatives, friends, and even coworkers to give FABC a try. Under Luter’s guidance, FABC grew so rapidly that within a decade it had both the need and the revenue for a new facility. By 2005 the congregation claimed more than 7,000 members and was the largest Southern Baptist Convention (SBC) church in the state.
Luter’s church building was largely destroyed when Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans in 2005, and congregants were scattered throughout the country. Luter immediately began to both reconstruct his damaged church building and regather his congregation. He continued to preach to the members of his flock who remained at home and traveled to members who had been evacuated to such cities as Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and Houston. He arranged for FABC’s parishioners to hold early morning services across town at the First Baptist Church, which had been largely spared, until FABC’s new church building opened in April 2008.
Meanwhile, Luter’s star continued to rise in the SBC. In 2011 he was elected the denomination’s first black vice president, and at the denomination’s annual meeting in June 2012, he was the only candidate on the ballot for the SBC presidency. His election as president was a bellwether of the SBC’s transformation from a predominantly white institution founded by pro-slavery Baptists in 1845 to an ethnically and racially diverse denomination that was also the largest Protestant denomination in the U.S. In the middle third of the 20th century, the SBC was still more than 90 percent white; by 2012, however, about one-quarter of SBC members were nonwhite, particularly black and Hispanic. During the same annual meeting at which Luter was named president, a proposal that he had favoured to permit some congregations to use the name Great Commission Baptists as an alternative to the denomination’s official name (which remained Southern Baptist Convention) passed by a vote of 53 percent to 46 percent. Luter was among those Southern Baptists who had encouraged the alternative name as a sign of sensitivity to those for whom the official name evoked the denomination’s racist past. Luter stepped down as president in 2014, after having served two terms.
