Germanic religion and mythology,  complex of stories, lore, and beliefs about the gods and the nature of the cosmos developed by the Germanic-speaking peoples before their conversion to Christianity.
Germanic culture extended, at various times, from the Black Sea to Greenland, or even the North American continent. Germanic religion played an important role in shaping the civilization of Europe. But since the Germanic peoples of the Continent and of England were converted to Christianity in comparatively early times, it is not surprising that less is known about the gods whom they used to worship and the forms of their religious cults than about those of Scandinavia, where Germanic religion survived until relatively late in the Middle Ages.
The works of classical authors, written mostly in Latin and occasionally in Greek, throw some light on the religion of Germanic peoples; however, their interest in the religious practices of Germanic tribes remains limited to its direct relevance to their narrative, as when Strabo describes the gory sacrifice of Roman prisoners by the Cimbri at the end of the 2nd century bc.
For all his knowledge of the Celts, Caesar had no more than a superficial knowledge of Germans. He made some judicious observations in Commentarii de bello Gallico about their social and political organization, but his remarks on their religion were rather perfunctory. Contrasting Germans with the Celts of Gaul, Caesar claimed that the Germans had no druids (i.e., organized priesthood), nor zeal for sacrifice, and counted as gods only the Sun, the fire god (Vulcan or Vulcanus), and the Moon. His limited information accounts for Caesar’s assumption of the poverty of the Germanic religion and the partial inaccuracy and incompleteness of his statement.
Tacitus, on the contrary, provided a lucid picture of customs and religious practices of continental Germanic tribes in his Germania, written c. ad 98. He describes some of their rituals and occasionally names a god or goddess. While Tacitus presumably never visited Germany, his information was partly based on direct sources; he also used older works, now lost.
As the power of Rome declined, records grew poorer, and nothing of great importance survives before the Getica, a history of the Goths written by the Gothic historian Jordanes c. 550; it was based on a larger (lost) work of Cassiodorus, which also incorporated the earlier work of Ablavius. The Getica incorporates valuable records of Gothic tradition, the origin of the Goths, and some important remarks about the gods whom the Goths worshipped and the forms of their sacrifices, human and otherwise.
A story about the origin of the Lombards is given in a tract, Origo gentis Langobardorum (“Origin of the Nation of Lombards”), of the late 7th century. It relates how the goddess Frea, wife of Godan (Wodan), tricked her husband into granting the Lombards victory over the Vandals. The story shows that the divine pair, recognizable from Scandinavian sources as Odin and Frigg, was known to the Lombards at this early time. A rather similar story about this pair is told in a Scandinavian source. The Lombard Paul the Deacon, working late in the 8th or early in the 9th century, repeated the tale just mentioned in his fairly comprehensive Historia Langobardorum (“History of the Lombards”). Paul used written sources available to him and seemed also to draw upon Lombard tradition in prose and verse.
The Venerable Bede, writing his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum (“Ecclesiastical History of the English People”) early in the 8th century, showed much interest in the conversion of the English and some in their earlier religion. The lives of Irish and Anglo-Saxon missionaries who worked among Germanic peoples on the Continent (e.g., Columbanus, Willibrord, and Boniface) provide some information about pagan customs and sacrifices.
The first detailed document touching upon the early religion of Scandinavia is the biography by St. Rembert (or Rimbert) of St. Ansgar (or Anskar), a 9th-century missionary and now patron saint of Scandinavia, who twice visited the royal seat, Björkö, in eastern Sweden, and noticed some religious practices, among them the worship of a dead king. Ansgar was well received by the Swedes, but it was much later that they adopted Christianity.
Some two centuries later, c. 1072, Adam of Bremen compiled his Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum (History of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen), which included a description of the lands in the north, then part of the ecclesiastical province of Hamburg. Adam’s work is particularly rich in descriptions of the festivals and sacrifices of the Swedes, who were still largely pagan in his day.
