Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch and All the East, also called Orthodox Church Of Antioch,  autocephalous (ecclesiastically independent) Eastern Orthodox patriarchate, third in honorific rank after the churches of Constantinople and Alexandria; it is the largest Arab Christian church in the Middle East.
The authority of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch and All the East was limited after the Council of Chalcedon (451) to the community known as Romans, or Melchites (Emperor’s Men), because they were in communion with the Byzantine, or east Roman, emperor. The literary language of this community was Greek, but from the 9th century onward there were parishes where Arabic was the only language generally known, and therefore parts of the church services were translated into Arabic. In modern times the Orthodox Church of Antioch assumed the character of an Arab Eastern Orthodox institution.
Since the 14th century the patriarch has resided in Damascus, Syria, whereas the ancient city of Antioch, situated on Turkish territory, has remained a small city. Since 1899 the patriarch and all of his bishops have been Arabs. There are metropolitans under his jurisdiction in Syria (Homs, Hama, Aleppo, al-Lādhiqīyah, and as-Suwaydā), Lebanon (Beirut, Tripoli, al-Ḥadath, Ḥalbā, Zaḥlah, and Marj ʿUyūn), and Baghdad; several new episcopal sees have been established in North and South America and in Australia. The principal liturgical language is now Arabic, though Greek is still used, and English has been adopted in the United States.
The number of faithful in the Orthodox Church of Antioch approaches 1,100,000; in Syria it is the largest Christian community, while in Lebanon it is second only to the Maronite Church. Since World War II, an active youth movement has provided new leadership in the church. A graduate theological school has been established in Dayr al-Balmand, near Tripoli, Lebanon, while several bishops and theologians have been active in the World Council of Churches.
