Halakhah, (Hebrew: “the Way”)  also spelled Halakha, Halakah, or Halachah, plural Halakhahs, Halakhot, Halakhoth, or Halachot,  in Judaism, the totality of laws and ordinances that have evolved since biblical times to regulate religious observances and the daily life and conduct of the Jewish people. Quite distinct from the Law, or the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Bible), Halakhah purports to preserve and represent oral traditions stemming from the revelation on Mount Sinai or evolved on the basis of it. The legalistic nature of Halakhah also sets it apart from those parts of rabbinic, or Talmudic, literature that include history, fables, and ethical teachings (Haggada). That Halakhah existed from ancient times is confirmed from nonpentateuchal passages of the Bible, where, for example, servitude is mentioned as a legitimate penalty for unpaid debts (2 Kings 4:1).
Oral traditions concerning Jewish law passed from generation to generation, and eventually it became apparent that they required organization. The work of gathering opinions and interpretations was begun by Rabbi Akiba in the 1st–2nd century ce and carried on by his disciples, such as Rabbi Meïr. Early in the 3rd century this new compilation, the Mishna, was complete, arranged in its final form by Judah ha-Nasi. Though the Mishna contained the most comprehensive collection of Jewish laws up to that time, it was not meant to settle issues involving contradictory interpretations. Almost immediately, however, Jewish scholars in Palestine and Babylonia began to elaborate extensive interpretations of the Mishna that were called Gemara. When the work was completed several centuries later, the Mishna and the Gemara, taken together, were called the Talmud.
Centuries later, social and economic changes presented new problems of interpretation and required new applications of the law. This gave rise to new compilations of Halakhah by such outstanding scholars as Moses Maimonides in the 12th century, Jacob ben Asher in the 12th and 13th centuries, and Joseph Karo in the 16th century.
Though Judaism acknowledges a continuous development of Halakhah, the law is always viewed as an explication or extension of the original Law given on Mount Sinai. Conservative rabbis tend to adapt certain Halakhahs to fit conditions in the modern world, as, for instance, the Halakhah regarding observance of the Sabbath. Reform Jews tend to disregard Halakhah, though some of them adhere to certain of its precepts.
Interpretations and discussions of law directly related to texts of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) are referred to as Midrash Halakhah.
