Hannah Adams,  (born Oct. 2, 1755, Medfield, Mass. [U.S.]—died Dec. 15, 1831, Brookline, Mass.), American compiler of historical information in the study of religion.
Adams was the daughter of a notably eccentric bibliophile father whose lack of business acumen kept the large family in poverty. She inherited his love of books and his remarkable memory, and, although she received no formal schooling, she was well tutored by divinity students boarding in her home. One of these students introduced her to the Reverend Thomas Broughton’s Historical Dictionary of All Religions, which prompted her to read widely and keep voluminous notes in the field of religions. Her notes were published in 1784 as An Alphabetical Compendium of the Various Sects Which Have Appeared from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Present Day. The book was well received, saw three more American editions and three in London, and brought its author a modest financial return. Determined to earn her living in this way, she set to work on A Summary History of New-England, which appeared in 1799.
By the time of publication of her History, Adams’s eyesight had been affected by her constant work. While preparing an abridged version of her work for the use of teachers, she learned that the Reverend Jedidiah Morse, a staunchly conservative Calvinist, was engaged in a similar project. Morse’s book appeared first, and the sale of Adams’s book apparently suffered as a result. A number of Boston intellectuals, motivated by both admiration for Adams and antipathy to Morse, precipitated a public controversy over the matter, in which Morse conducted himself so clumsily as to lose all public support. Adams herself took little part in the celebrated controversy. Several of her Boston supporters established an annuity for her, and the rest of her days were devoted to the compilation of data. She published The Truth and Excellence of the Christian Religion Exhibited (1804), History of the Jews (1812), and Letters on the Gospels (1824). A Memoir of Miss Hannah Adams, Written by Herself appeared the year after her death.
