Harmandir Sahib, Harmandir also spelled Harimandir, also called Darbar Sahib (Punjabi: “Sacred Audience”) or Golden Temple,  the chief gurdwara, or house of worship, of Sikhism and the Sikhs’ most important pilgrimage site. It is located in the city of Amritsar, Punjab state, northwestern India.
The first Harmandir Sahib was built in 1604 by Arjan, the fifth Sikh Guru, who symbolically had it placed on a lower level so that even the humblest had to step down to enter it. He also included entrances on all four sides, signifying that it was open to worshippers of all castes and creeds. The foundation stone was laid by Mian Mīr, a Muslim divine of Lahore (now in Pakistan). The temple was destroyed several times by Afghan invaders and was finally rebuilt in marble and copper overlaid with gold foil during the reign (1801–39) of Maharaja Ranjit Singh. The structure thus became known as the Golden Temple.
The Harmandir Sahib is the focus of a complex of buildings that form the heart of Sikhism. The temple itself occupies a small island in the centre of the tank, or pool, called the Amrita Saras (“Pool of Nectar”)—the source of the city’s name—and is connected to land on its west side by a marble causeway running across the water of the pool. Situated facing the entrance to the causeway is the Akal Takht, the chief centre of authority of Sikhism and the headquarters of the Shiromani Akali Dal (Supreme Akali Party), the main political party of the Sikhs in Punjab. On the north side of the tank is the main entrance to the complex and the Teja Singh Samudri Hall (Clock Tower), which houses the main offices of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (Supreme Committee of Temple Management), which oversees the main Sikh gurdwaras. Among several buildings on the east side of the tank are the Assembly Hall and the Guru Ram Das Langur, the latter a large dining hall that serves meals to thousands of pilgrims and other visitors each day.
The Harmandir Sahib itself sustained some minor damage on June 6, 1984, when Indian troops fought their way into the temple complex to dislodge Sikh extremists who had been using it as a fortress and refuge. The Akal Takht, however, was heavily damaged in the attack. Both buildings subsequently were repaired.
