Hassan al-Banna, also spelled Ḥasan al-Bannāʾ,  (born 1906, Egypt—died  February 1949, Cairo), Egyptian political and religious leader who established a new religious society, the Muslim Brotherhood, and played a central role in Egyptian political and social affairs.
At age 12 Hassan al-Banna joined the Society for Moral Behaviour, thus demonstrating at an early age the deep concern for religious affairs that characterized his entire life. In 1923 he enrolled at the Dār al-ʿUlūm, a teacher-training school in Cairo, which maintained a traditional religious and social outlook. In 1927 he was assigned to teach Arabic in a primary school in the city of Ismailia (al-Ismāʿīliyyah), near the Suez Canal, which was a focal point for the foreign economic and military occupation of Egypt. There he witnessed scenes that acutely distressed him and many other Muslims. In March 1928, with six workers from a British camp labour force, he created the Society of the Muslim Brothers (Arabic: al-Ikhwān al-Muslimūn), which aimed at a rejuvenation of Islam.
In the 1930s, at his own request, Hassan al-Banna was transferred to a teaching post in Cairo. By the advent of World War II the Muslim Brotherhood had grown enormously and had become a potent element on the Egyptian scene, attracting significant numbers of students, civil servants, urban labourers, and others, and representing almost every group in Egyptian society.
Many of the members came to view the Egyptian government as betraying the interests of Egyptian nationalism. For a while Hassan al-Banna tried to maintain a tactical alliance with the government, but he and his followers had become a threat to the central authorities. In the turmoil of the postwar years many elements of the society passed beyond his authority, and members were implicated in a number of assassinations, notably that of Prime Minister Maḥmūd Fahmī al-Nuqrāshī Pasha in December 1948. With the connivance of the government, Hassan al-Banna himself was assassinated the following year.
