Henry Beaufort,  (born c. 1374—died April 11, 1447, Winchester, Hampshire, England), cardinal and bishop of Winchester and a dominant figure in English politics throughout the first 43 years of the 15th century. From about 1435 until 1443 he controlled the government of the weak King Henry VI.
Beaufort’s father was John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, son of King Edward III, and his mother was Catherine Swynford. During the reign of his cousin King Richard II, he became chancellor of Oxford University (1397) and bishop of Lincoln (1398).
With the accession of his half brother, Henry IV, in 1399, Beaufort was guaranteed a prominent place in politics. In 1403 he became chancellor of England and a royal councillor. In the following year he was appointed bishop of Winchester, one of the richest sees in the country. He then resigned his chancellorship and led the opposition within the council to Henry IV’s chief minister, Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury. When Beaufort’s nephew and political ally became king as Henry V in 1413, Beaufort again received the chancellorship. In order to climb still higher, the ambitious bishop sought a position with the papacy. Pope Martin V made him a cardinal and papal legate in 1417, but the king, fearing that Beaufort would be an all too effective spokesman for papal policies, soon forced him to resign these ecclesiastical offices.
Upon the accession of the infant Henry VI in 1422, however, Beaufort’s talents were allowed to flourish. Already wealthy, he enriched himself further by lending money to the insolvent crown at high interest rates. Beaufort’s financing of the state solidified his power; there was little his enemies could do against the man on whom the solvency of the government depended. Beaufort was made cardinal of St. Eusebius and papal legate in 1426, a move for which he was continually attacked by his nephew, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, who criticized him for simultaneously holding high positions in church and state. But Beaufort survived Gloucester’s sniping, and with the support of the young Henry VI, by the mid-1430s the government was firmly back in his hands. In 1435 and 1439 he attempted without success to negotiate an end to the Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453) between England and France, and in 1443 he retired from politics. Beaufort was arrogant, self-serving, and greedy to the point of rapacity, but his political and financial acumen were unrivaled in the England of his time.
