Heribert Of Antimiano, Italian Ariberto Da Antimiano,  (born c. 971, –980—died  Jan. 16, 1045, Milan [Italy]), archbishop of Milan who for two years led his city in defying the Holy Roman emperor Conrad II. During the Risorgimento, the period of Italian unification in the 19th century, Heribert’s fame was revived as an example of Italian nationalism.
Born to a family of Lombard origin belonging to the powerful class of capitanei (major nobles), Heribert rose rapidly in the church and became archbishop in 1018. He was at first a loyal stalwart of the Holy Roman emperors, who granted him privileges and in whose name in 1027 he led an army against recalcitrant Lodi, near Milan, to enforce his right to invest the bishop of Lodi.
In 1034 he commanded a Milanese contingent of Emperor Conrad’s army that crossed the Alps to fight Count Eudes II (Odo II) of Champagne. Not long after his return to Milan, an insurrection of the lesser nobility brought a serious crisis throughout Lombardy in northern Italy. Heribert at once assumed leadership of the party of order, halting the rebels in the bloody but indecisive Battle of Campomalo. He then called on the emperor for help. Conrad responded but evidently found Heribert’s own power threatening. Conrad convened a diet in Pavia (March 1037), where Heribert was placed on trial. Proudly refusing to defend himself, the archbishop was arrested and imprisoned but escaped and returned to Milan, which Conrad attacked in May 1037.
Under Heribert’s leadership the city heroically held out, forcing the emperor to abandon military for diplomatic tactics. But the emperor’s attempts to attract the lesser nobility by granting privileges failed, as did his effort to depose Heribert and name a new archbishop. The Milanese replied by destroying the new appointee’s houses in the city. In the fall of 1037 Heribert sent ambassadors to his former opponent, Eudes II of Champagne, offering him the crown of Italy, but Eudes died before the envoys reached him. Learning of the mission, Conrad forced the pope to excommunicate Heribert and continued to harass Milan until the summer of 1038, when he returned to Germany, exhorting his Italian vassals to take up the attack. Heribert responded by calling the Milanese to arms, rallying them to a new symbol, the carroccio (“war chariot”), bearing the banner of the city and the cross of the Milanese church, a device afterward adopted by other Lombard cities.
In the summer of 1039 Milan was surrounded by an army of the emperor’s allies poised to attack when news arrived of Conrad’s death, and the siege was abandoned. Traveling to Germany the following spring to swear fidelity to Conrad’s successor, Henry III, Heribert returned to find Milan once more in the grip of civil strife, this time between the nobles and the commoners (cives), led by a noble named Lanzone. Driven out of the city with the nobles, Heribert remained in exile until peace was concluded in 1044. In December of that year, gravely ill at Monza, near Milan, he made his will and then had himself taken to Milan, where he died.
