Holiness movement,  religious movement that arose in the 19th century among Protestant churches in the United States, characterized by a doctrine of sanctification centring on a postconversion experience. The numerous Holiness churches that arose during this period vary from quasi-Methodist sects to groups that are similar to Pentecostal churches.
In a sense the movement traces back to John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, who issued a call to Christian “perfection.” Perfection was to be the goal of all those who desired to be altogether Christian; it implied that the God who is good enough to forgive sin (justify) is obviously great enough to transform the sinners into saints (sanctify), thus enabling them to be free from outward sin as well as from “evil thoughts and tempers”—in short, to attain to a measure of holiness.
From the outset, the motto of colonial American Methodism was “to spread Christian holiness over these lands.” But, in practice, the doctrines of holiness and perfectionism were largely ignored by American Methodists during the early decades of the 19th century. In 1843 about two dozen ministers withdrew from the Methodist Episcopal Church to found the Wesleyan Methodist Church of America, establishing a pattern of defections or looser ties. Sizable numbers of Protestants from the rural areas of the Midwest and South were joining the Holiness movement. These people had a penchant for strict codes of dress and behaviour. Most of them had little sympathy for the “superficial, false, and fashionable” Christians allegedly preoccupied with wealth, social prestige, and religious formalism.
Between 1880 and World War I a number of new Holiness groups emerged. Some, such as the Church of God (Anderson, Ind.), were established to protest against bureaucratic denominationalism. Others, such as the Christian and Missionary Alliance and the Church of the Nazarene, tended to serve the spiritual and social needs of the urban poor, who quite frequently were ignored by the middle-class congregations representing the mainstream of Protestantism. Almost all of these Holiness bodies arose in order to facilitate the proclamation of a second-blessing experience of sanctification with its concomitants, a life of separation from worldly values and adherence to practical holiness—views, according to the Holiness churches, that were no longer endorsed by the larger denominations.
Although most of these newly emergent Holiness groups were destined to have only limited local or regional influence, several of them demonstrated a remarkable capacity for sustained growth. Among these are the “older” denominations—the Wesleyan Methodist Church and the Free Methodist Church of North America (founded 1860)—as well as the newer ones: the Church of God (Anderson, Ind.), the Christian and Missionary Alliance, the Salvation Army, and the Church of the Nazarene. The Church of the Nazarene, whose members constitute nearly a third of the total membership of the Holiness movement, is generally recognized as being its most influential representative.
Having been affected by 19th-century pietism and revivalism, contemporary Holiness churches tend to stand closer, doctrinally speaking, to fundamentalism than to their Methodist antecedents. In examining their tenets, one encounters such evidences of conservative evangelical belief as “plenary inspiration” (verbal inspiration of the Bible), “Christ’s atonement for the entire human race,” and “the personal Second Coming of Christ.” In the doctrinal statements of a few churches—Church of the Nazarene and Christian and Missionary Alliance—brief allusions to divine healing and the Pentecostal experience of speaking in tongues do appear. However, these must not be construed as sufficient grounds for identifying the Holiness churches with the Pentecostal movement—against which, in fact, many Holiness groups have inveighed.
