Holy order,  any of several grades in the ordained ministry of some of the Christian churches, comprising at various times the major orders of bishop, priest, deacon, and subdeacon and the minor orders of porter (doorkeeper), lector, exorcist, and acolyte.
The term order (Latin: ordo, plural ordines) was adopted by the early Christian church from Roman civil life and was first used ecclesiastically by Tertullian to mean both clergy and laity. Gradually it came to mean some office in the church to which a person had been specifically admitted by a bishop.
In the early church a person was evidently not required to pass by regular steps from a lower to a higher order, and a layman could pass directly to any office in the church. After the 9th century it became the rule that a man must progress from a lower to a higher order.
In the Roman Catholic church holy orders is one of the seven sacraments (e.g, baptism, confirmation, Eucharist, penance, anointing the sick, holy orders, matrimony); the rite is so complex, however, that all theologians do not agree that it is a single sacrament. There is theological consensus that the orders of bishop, priest, and probably deacon are sacramental in character, but there is debate as to whether these three constitute one sacrament or two or three. All eight orders were formerly found in the Roman Catholic church, but, by a motu proprio of Pope Paul VI (effective January 1, 1973), there are now only the orders of bishop, priest, and deacon and the ministries of acolyte and lector. A candidate for holy orders must be a baptized male who has reached the required age, has attained the appropriate academic standard, is of suitable character, and has a specific clerical position awaiting him. Since the second Vatican Council (1962–65), married men may be ordained to the permanent diaconate; otherwise, celibacy is a requirement for holy orders, except in certain specified cases. It is possible for priests to withdraw from the ministry through a process called laicization, which has become more common since the late 1960s.
In the Eastern Orthodox church a candidate must fulfill the same requirements as in the Roman Catholic church, except that celibacy is not required for the diaconate or for the priesthood. A priest may remain married if he was married before his ordination but must not remarry if his wife dies after he is ordained. An unmarried priest must remain celibate. Only unmarried or widowed priests may be consecrated bishop. There are only two minor orders, lectors and subdeacons, but in practice these grades of the ministry have tended to lapse. A priest can divest himself of his orders and become a layman.
In the Church of England the four minor orders, the subdiaconate, and the requirement of celibacy were abolished during the Reformation. The requirements for becoming a priest or deacon are otherwise similar to those in the Roman Catholic church, except that women can hold these orders and a deacon must be age 23 years or older. Bishops must take an oath of temporal allegiance to the English sovereign. Since 1870 it has been possible for a member of the clergy to relinquish holy orders. Other churches within the Anglican Communion have essentially the same requirements for holy orders as the Church of England.
In Protestantism the accession to the formal ministry of preaching and administering the sacraments is known as ordination.
