Hubert Walter,  (died July 13, 1205, Teynham, Kent, Eng.), archbishop of Canterbury, papal legate, justiciar of King Richard I of England, and chancellor of King John of England. Hubert was an administrator whose position in church and state was unmatched until the time of Cardinal Wolsey in the 16th century.
Employed in the household of King Henry II of England by 1182, he became bishop of Salisbury in October 1189. The following year he traveled with Richard and Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury on the Third Crusade, in which his distinguished services included negotiating on Richard’s behalf with the Muslim leader Saladin and directing the return of English forces.
Returning to England in April 1193 after visiting Richard in captivity at Dürnstein, Austria, he was elected archbishop of Canterbury on May 30. On becoming justiciar in the following December, he controlled England’s highest ecclesiastical and secular offices. In 1193 he raised Richard’s ransom and suppressed an attempt by Prince John to seize control of England. After Richard’s return in March 1194 and departure for Normandy in the following May, Hubert became the effective governor of England for the rest of Richard’s reign and was particularly prominent because of the king’s prolonged absences. In March 1195 Pope Celestine III appointed him papal legate.
Hubert was mainly responsible for one of England’s most remarkable periods of administrative development. Among his key accomplishments were: the first attempt to tax revenue and chattels for secular purposes, in the levy of 25 percent for Richard’s ransom; the first general assize of weights and measures (1196); the reassessment of taxation on land (1198); and the modification of feudal military service. Maintaining order ruthlessly, he ordered the execution of William Fitz Osbert, the leader of a protest against the assessment of London taxes. Richard had Hubert’s conduct investigated in 1196. After offering to resign, he continued his justiciarship until July 1198, when illness and remonstrations from Pope Innocent III led him to quit.
King John, Richard’s successor, appointed him chancellor on May 27, 1199, a post in which Hubert exercised great political influence. He was instrumental in securing the throne for John and in one of his last acts (1205) advised the king against a campaign in France, which was at general war with England. 
