Hugh Blair,  (born April 7, 1718, Edinburgh, Scotland—died December 27, 1800, Edinburgh), Scottish minister and university professor, best known for his Sermons, which enjoyed an extraordinary popularity during his lifetime, and for his lectures on rhetoric and the fine arts.
In 1730 Blair entered the University of Edinburgh, where he received an M.A. in 1739. His thesis, De Fundamentis et Obligatione Legis Naturae (“On the Foundation and Obligation of the Law of Nature”), contains an outline of the moral principles that he later developed in his sermons. He was licensed to preach in 1741, and a few months later he was presented to the parish of Collessie in Fife. In 1743 he began ministering at the Canongate church in Edinburgh; he moved on to Lady Yester’s, one of the city churches, in 1754. In 1757 the University of St. Andrews conferred on him an honorary doctorate degree, and in the following year he was promoted to the cathedral of St. Giles (the High Kirk of Edinburgh), the most important charge in Scotland. In 1759 he began, under the patronage of Henry Home, Lord Kames, to deliver a course of lectures on composition. The success of the lectures led to the foundation of a chair of rhetoric and belles lettres at the University of Edinburgh, to which he was appointed in 1762.
Having long taken an interest in the Gaelic poetry of the Highlands, Blair published in 1763 the laudatory A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Ossian, the Son of Fingal, in which he asserted the authenticity of the poetry James Macpherson collected in such volumes as Fingal (1762) and Temora (1763) and attributed to the 3rd-century poet Ossian. In 1777 the first volume of Blair’s Sermons appeared. It was succeeded by four other volumes. Samuel Johnson praised them warmly, and they were translated into almost every language of Europe. In 1780 George III conferred upon Blair an annual pension of £200. In 1783 Blair retired from his professorship and published Lectures on Rhetoric. He belonged to the “moderate,” or latitudinarian, party, and his Sermons were criticized as wanting in doctrinal definiteness. His works are written in a flowing and elaborate style, although critics often dismiss them as displaying little originality.
