I AM movement,  theosophical movement founded in Chicago in the early 1930s by Guy W. Ballard (1878–1939), a mining engineer, and his wife, Edna W. Ballard (1886–1971). The name of the movement is a reference to the Bible verse in which God replies to Moses, “I am who I am” (Exodus 3:14). Despite legal and public relations difficulties, the movement thrived and inspired a number of subsequent movements based on its teachings.
Ballard claimed that in 1930 during a visit to Mount Shasta (a dormant volcano in northern California), he was contacted by St. Germain, one of the Ascended Masters of the Great White Brotherhood. Many occultists believe that this order of spiritual beings guides the overall destiny of humankind and speaks through human messengers. The first modern contact with the Masters was allegedly made in the 19th century by Madame Helena Blavatsky (1831–91), one of the founders of the Theosophical Society.
Writing under the name Godfrey Ray King, Ballard compiled his experiences in a book, Unveiled Mysteries, published in 1934, and he afterward claimed to receive regular messages, termed “discourses,” from St. Germain and other Masters. Because one of the Masters from whom Ballard received dictations was Jesus, members of the I AM movement consider themselves Christian. The Ballards claimed to have received more than 3,000 messages, which formed the body of the movement’s teachings.
The Ballards incorporated the I AM movement in 1932. Following Guy Ballard’s death, Edna Ballard became the movement’s leader and revealed the messages she had received from St. Germain. With her death in 1971, the Board of Directors, which had been established at the movement’s incorporation in 1932, took control of the movement. Since then, no further dictations from the Masters have been received, because no new messenger has been appointed to succeed the Ballards.
The Masters’ discourses emphasized ways for individuals to become aware of their “I AM,” or “God Presence,” which flows from God, the mighty Creative Fire at the centre of the universe. Ultimately, each person hopes to ascend into the divine realms, as the Ballards are believed to have done at the end of their lives. The reciting of decrees—invocations of the divine that call for the manifestation in the visible world of a desired condition or the removal of an undesirable one—is the primary devotional activity of members of the movement. Listening to the messages recorded by the Ballards is the central activity of I AM gatherings.
The I AM movement also promotes American patriotism. The messages received by Ballard suggested that the United States had a special role in the Masters’ world plan, and members of the movement believe that Ballard was a reincarnation of George Washington. The group sponsors special programs on patriotic holidays.
The growing movement was disrupted by Ballard’s sudden death in 1939. Soon afterward, several former members accused the Ballards of teaching a sham religion, which led to the indictment and conviction of Edna Ballard and other movement leaders for mail fraud. In 1946 the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the conviction.
As a result of the lengthy judicial process and the subsequent bad publicity, the movement assumed a very low profile in the 1950s, and many thought that it had died. During the second half of the 20th century it experienced steady growth, and in the early 21st century it reported more than 300 chartered I AM sanctuaries in the United States and around the world. The most prominent group inspired by the I AM movement was the Church Universal and Triumphant. Others, such as the Aetherius Society, pictured the Masters as officials of an extraterrestrial government who offer guidance from unidentified flying objects (UFOs). 
