Inca religion,  Inca religion, religion of the Inca civilization in the Andean regions of South America. It was an admixture of complex ceremonies, practices, animistic beliefs, varied forms of belief in objects having magical powers, and nature worship—culminated in the worship of the sun, which was presided over by the Inca priests. Though there was an Inca state religion of the sun, the substrata religious beliefs and practices of the pre-Inca peoples exerted an influence on the Andean region prior to and after the conquest of most of South America by the Spaniards in the 16th century.
Viracocha was the creator god of the Inca and of pre-Inca peoples. Creator of earth, humans, and animals, Viracocha had a long list of titles, including Lord Instructor of the World, the Ancient One, and the Old Man of the Sky. Some have said that he also was the creator of the Tiwanaku civilization, of which the Inca were the cultural heirs. Viracocha went through several transmogrifications (often with grotesque or humorous effects). He made peoples, destroyed them, and re-created them of stone; when they were re-created, he dispersed humankind in four directions. He was also a culture hero, and he taught people various techniques and skills. He journeyed widely until he came to the shores of Manta (Ecuador), where he set off into the Pacific—some say in a boat made of his cloak, others say he walked on the water. This part of the myth has been seized upon by modern mythmakers, and, as Kon-Tiki, Viracocha was said to have brought Inca culture to Polynesia.
Viracocha was the divine protector of the Inca ruler Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui; he appeared to Pachacuti in a dream when the Inca forces were being besieged by the Chanca, a group from the lands west of the Inca territory. Upon victory, Pachacuti raised a temple to Viracocha in Cuzco. He was represented by a gold figure “about the size of a 10-year-old child.”
Inti, the sun god, was the ranking deity in the Inca pantheon. His warmth embraced the Andean earth and matured crops, and he was beloved by farmers. Inti was represented with a human face on a ray-splayed disk. He was considered to be the divine ancestor of the Inca: “my father” was a title given to Inti by one Inca ruler.
Apu Illapu was a rain giver, an agricultural deity to whom the common Inca addressed their prayers for rain. Temples to Illapu were usually on high structures; in times of drought, pilgrimages were made to them and prayers were accompanied by sacrifices—often human, if the crisis was sufficient. The people believed that Illapu’s shadow was in the Milky Way, from whence he drew the water that he poured down as rain.
Mama Quilla (Mama-Kilya) was the wife of the sun god. She was the Moon Mother and the regulator of women’s menstrual cycles. The waxing and waning of the moon was used to calculate monthly cycles, from which the time periods for Inca festivals were set. Silver was considered to be tears of the moon. The stars had minor functions. The constellation of Lyra, which was believed to have the appearance of a llama, was entreated for protection. The constellation Scorpio was believed to have the shape of a cat. The Pleiades were called “little mothers,” and festivals were celebrated on their reappearance in the sky. Earth was called Pachamama (Paca Mama), or Earth Mother. The sea, which was relatively remote to the Inca until after 1450, was called Cochamama (Mama Qoca), the Sea Mother.
Temples and shrines housing fetishes of the cult were occupied by priests, their attendants, and the Chosen Women, who lived in temple convents under a vow of chastity and performed such duties as preparing ritual food, maintaining a sacred fire, and weaving garments for ritual use. In general, temples were not intended to shelter the celebrants, since most ceremonies were held outside the temple proper. The ruins of the Temple of Viracocha at San Pedro Cacha (Peru), however, had a ground plan that measured 330 by 87 feet, which indicates that it was designed for use other than the storage of priestly regalia.
The best-known Inca temple is the Sun Temple in Cuzco. Another, at Vilcashuamán (which was regarded as the geographic centre of the empire), is a large temple still existing. There was a temple where sacrifices were made near Mount Aconcagua in Argentina, at the southern limit of the Inca empire. On Titicaca Island (Isla del Sol), one of the largest of several islands in Lake Titicaca, there was a temple of the sun.
As the Inca conquered new territories, temples were erected in the new lands. In Caranqui, Ecuador, one such temple was described by a chronicler as being filled with great vessels of gold and silver. At Latacunga (Llacta cunga) in Ecuador there was a sun temple where sacrifices were made; part of the temple was still visible when the German explorer and geographer Alexander von Humboldt sketched the ruins in 1801.
The Sun Temple in Cuzco, built with stones, had a circumference of more than 1,200 feet. Within the temple was an image of the sun and in another precinct, the Golden Enclosure (Corincancha), were gold models of cornstalks, llamas, and lumps of earth. Portions of the land, which supported the temples, the priests, and the Chosen Women, were allotted to the sun and administered for the priests.
Along with the shrines and temples, huacas (sacred sites) were widespread. A huaca could be a man-made temple, mountain, hill, or bridge, such as the great huacachaca across the Apurímac River. A huaca also might be a mummy bundle, especially if it was that of a lord-Inca. On high points of passage in the Andes, propitiatory cairns (apacheta, “piles of stones”) were made, to which, in passing, each person would add a small stone and pray that his journey be lightened. The idea of huaca was intimately bound up with religion, combining the magical and the charm-bearing.
Priests were in residence at all important shrines and temples. A chronicler suggests that a priest’s title was umu, but in usage his title was geared to his functions as diviner of lungs, sorcerer, confessor, and curer. The title of the chief priest in Cuzco, who was of noble lineage, was villac umu, a lifetime post. He was married, had power over all shrines and temples, and could appoint and remove priests. Presumably, priests were chosen young, brought up by the more experienced, and acquired with practice the richly developed ceremonialism.
Divination was the prerequisite to all action. Nothing of importance was undertaken without recourse to divination. It was used to diagnose illness, to predict the outcome of battles, and to uncover crimes, thus giving it a judiciary function. Divination was also used to determine what sacrifice should be made to what god. Life was believed to be controlled by the all-pervading unseen powers, and to determine these portents the priests had recourse to the supernatural. Oracles were considered to be the most important and direct means of access to the wayward gods. One oracle of a huaca close to the Huaca–Chaca Bridge, across the Apurímac River near Cuzco, was described by a chronicler as a wooden beam as thick as a fat man, with a girdle of gold about it with two large golden breasts like a woman. These and other idols were blood-spattered from sacrifices, both animal and human. “Through this large idol,” a chronicler wrote, “the demon of the river used to speak to them.” Another well-known oracle was housed in a temple in the large adobe complex of Pachacamac near Lima.
Divination also was accomplished by other means, such as watching the meandering of spiders and the arrangement that coca leaves took in a shallow dish. Another method of divination was to drink ayahuasca, a psychedelic brewed from plants that profoundly affected the central nervous system. This was believed to enable one to communicate with the supernatural powers.
Fire also was thought to be a medium of spiritual contact. The flames were blown to red heat through metal tubes, after which a practitioner (yacarca) who had narcotized himself by chewing coca leaves summoned the spirits with fiery conjuration to speak—“which they did,” wrote a chronicler, by “ventriloquism.” Divination by studying the lungs of a sacrificed white llama was believed to be effective. The lungs were inflated by blowing into the dissected trachea (there is an Inca ceramic showing this), and the future was foretold by priests who minutely observed the conformance of the veins. On the reading of this augury, political or military action was taken.
Confession was part of the priestly ritual of divination. Should rain not fall or a water conduit break without cause, it was believed that such an occurrence could arise from someone’s failure to observe the strictly observed ceremonies. This was called hocha, a ritual error. Individual misdeeds would wound the ayllu, a basic social unit identified with communally held land. Crimes had to be confessed and expiated by penitence so as not to call down the divine wrath.
Sacrifice, human or animal, was offered on every important occasion; guinea pigs (more properly cui), llamas, certain foods, coca leaves, and chicha (an intoxicant corn beverage) were all used in sacrifices. Many sacrifices were daily occurrences for the ritual of the sun’s appearance. A fire was kindled, and corn was thrown on the coals and toasted. “Eat this, Lord Sun,” officiating priests said, “so that you will know that we are your children.” On the first day of every lunar month 100 pure-white llamas were driven into the Great Square, Huayaca Pata in Cuzco; they were moved about to the various images of the gods and then assigned to 30 priestly attendants, each representing a day of the month. The llamas were then sacrificed; chunks of flesh were thrown onto the fire, and the bones were powdered for ritual use. Ponchos or miniature vestments were burned in the offering. The Inca ruler wore his poncho only once: it was ceremoniously sacrificed in fire each day.
Humans also were sacrificed. When the need was extreme, such as when a new Inca ruler assumed the royal fringe, 200 children might be immolated. Defeats, famine, and pestilence all called for human blood. Even a Chosen Woman from the Sun Temple might be taken out for sacrifice. Children, before being sacrificed, feasted “so that they would not enter the presence of the gods hungry and crying.” It was important in human sacrifice that the sacrificed person be without blemish. Many were chosen from the conquered provinces as part of regular taxation; “blood money” was scarcely a metaphor.
The 30-day calendar was religious, and each month had its own festival. The religious calendar is explained in considerable detail by Peruvian author and illustrator Felipe Guamán Poma de Ayala. In El primer nueva corónica y buen gobierno (translated in abridgement as Letter to a King) to Philip III he offered two different versions, one centring on state ceremonies and sacrifices performed at Cuzco and the other describing the agricultural practices at the local level in the highlands. Quite different calendars prevailed on the irrigated coast, but surviving sources do not record them in any detail.
