Increase Mather,  (born June 21, 1639, Dorchester, Massachusetts Bay Colony [U.S.]—died August 23, 1723, Boston), Boston Congregational minister, author, and educator, who was a determining influence in the councils of New England during the crucial period when leadership passed into the hands of the first native-born generation. He was the son of Richard Mather, son-in-law of John Cotton, and father of Cotton Mather.
He entered Harvard at the age of 12 and received a bachelor’s degree at 17. At graduation, his attack on Aristotelian logic, basic to the Harvard curriculum, shocked the faculty and nearly resulted in his dismissal. On his 18th birthday he preached his first sermon in a village near his home and his second in his father’s church in Dorchester. Soon he left for Dublin, where he entered Trinity College and received a master’s degree the following June. At his commencement, he refused to wear a cap and gown, but the assembled scholars were so impressed with him that they hummed their approval of him. Chosen a fellow at Trinity, he refused the post.
He preached at various posts in England and was at Guernsey when the Puritan Commonwealth ended and Charles II was proclaimed king (May 8, 1660). He refused to drink to the king’s health or sign papers expressing rejoicing. On the appointment of a new governor for Guernsey, unsympathetic to Nonconformists, Increase left a comfortable living and in a few months sailed for New England, where he became minister of North Church, Boston, in 1661, and married his stepsister, Maria Cotton, in 1662. Maria died in 1714, and in 1715 he married Ann Cotton, widow of his nephew John.
In 1683 Charles delivered an ultimatum to the Massachusetts colonists: to retain their charter with absolute obedience to the king or to have it revoked. Before an assembly of freemen, Increase proclaimed that an affirmative vote would be a sin against God, for only to him should one give absolute obedience. The colonists refused submission, and the charter was subsequently revoked in 1686.
While James II was king, in 1688, Increase was sent as the representative of the colonists to thank him for his declaration of liberty to all faiths. He remained in England for several years, and, on the accession of William and Mary in 1689, he obtained from them the removal of the hated governor of Massachusetts, Sir Edmund Andros, and his replacement by Sir William Phipps. Increase’s petition for the restoration of the old charter proved unsuccessful, but he was able to get a new charter in 1691. Both the new governor and the new charter, however, turned out to be unpopular. In 1685 Increase had been made president of Harvard, but he resigned in 1701, in part because of opposition to the new colonial charter. He received the honorary degree of doctor of divinity in the same year.
Among his books is An Essay for the Recording of Illustrious Providences (1684), a compilation of stories showing the hand of Divine Providence in rescuing people from natural and supernatural disasters. Some historians suggest that this book conditioned the minds of the populace for the witchcraft hysteria of Salem in 1692. Despite the fact that Increase and Cotton Mather believed in witches—as did most of the world at the time—and that the guilty should be punished, they suspected that evidence could be faulty and justice might miscarry. Witches, like other criminals, were tried and sentenced to jail or the gallows by civil magistrates. The case against a suspect rested on “spectral evidence” (testimony of a victim of witchcraft that he or she had been attacked by a spectre bearing the appearance of someone the victim knew), which the Mathers distrusted because a witch could assume the form of an innocent person. When this type of evidence was finally thrown out of court at the insistence of the Mathers and other ministers, the whole affair came to an end.
Increase’s Case of Conscience Concerning Evil Spirits Personating Men (1693) is a clear vindication of the Mathers’ part in the witchcraft trials. Yet their enemies, such as William Douglass and Robert Calef, spread denigrating rumours about them. This enmity, together with the Mathers’ part in a campaign for inoculation against smallpox and the failure of their protégé Phipps to measure up to expectations, contributed to the decline of the Mathers’ influence in the last decade of the century. Changing times, more than anything else, had their impact, for people like the Mathers were losing touch with the younger generation.
