Isaac Mayer Wise,  (born March 29, 1819, Steingrub, Bohemia, Austrian Empire [now in Czech Republic]—died  March 26, 1900, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.), rabbi whose goal of uniting American Jewry made him the greatest organizer of Reform Jewish institutions in the United States.
After serving as a rabbi for two years in Radnice, Bohemia, Wise immigrated in 1846 to Albany, N.Y., where he was a rabbi for eight years. His congregation there was the first in the United States to employ family pews; these became a standard institution in Reform Judaism. In 1854 Wise accepted the pulpit of Bene Yeshurun in Cincinnati, a post he retained for the rest of his life.
Although Wise failed in his efforts to unite American Jews of all persuasions, he did bring about great unanimity among Reform Jews. In addition, he succeeded in adapting Reform Judaism to American life. An astute politician, he propagandized tirelessly for centralized Reform institutions in his English-language weekly, the American Israelite; in his German-language paper, Die Deborah; and in many rabbinical conferences.
The fruits of his efforts were the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (see American Hebrew Congregations, Union of), a confederation of synagogues in the Midwest and South that grew into an association of American and Canadian Reform congregations; its educational arm, Hebrew Union College (q.v.; now Hebrew Union College–Jewish Institute of Religion), the first permanent American rabbinical college, of which Wise was president until his death; and the Central Conference of American Rabbis, which became the legislative body of Reform Judaism. Wise served as president of the Central Conference until his death.
Because of the diversity of Reform prayer books, Wise tried to compile a standard work and in 1857 published the Minhag America (“American Usage”). It was superseded in 1894 by the Union Prayer Book, which came into being, in large part, because Wise had emphasized so often and so forcefully the need for a standard text. A believer in the universal mission of Judaism, he was a firm opponent of the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine.
