Jacobus Arminius, Dutch Jacob Harmensen or Jacob Hermansz,  (born October 10, 1560, Oudewater, Netherlands—died October 19, 1609, Leiden), theologian and minister of the Dutch Reformed Church who opposed the strict Calvinist teaching on predestination and who developed in reaction a theological system known later as Arminianism.
His father died when Arminius was an infant, and one Theodore Aemilius adopted the child and provided for his schooling in Utrecht. On the death of Aemilius in 1575, Rudolf Snellius (Snel van Roijen; 1546–1613), a professor at Marburg and a native of Oudewater, became the patron for his further education at the universities of Leiden (1576–82), Basel, and Geneva (1582–86).
After brief stays at the University of Padua, in Rome, and in Geneva, Arminius went to Amsterdam. He was ordained there in 1588. In 1603 Arminius was called to a theological professorship at Leiden, which he held until his death. These last six years of his life were dominated by theological controversy, in particular by his disputes with Franciscus Gomarus, his colleague at Leiden.
Considered a man of mild temperament, Arminius was forced into controversy against his own choice. He had earlier affirmed the Calvinist view of predestination, which held that those elected for salvation were so chosen prior to Adam’s Fall, but he gradually came to have doubts about this teaching. To him predestination seemed too harsh a position, because it did not provide a place for the exercise of human free will in the process of salvation. Hence, Arminius came to assert a conditional election, according to which God elects to eternal life those who will respond in faith to the divine offer of salvation. In so doing, he meant to place greater emphasis on God’s mercy.
After his death some of his followers gave support to his views by signing the Remonstrance, a theological document written by Johannes Uyttenbogaert, a minister from Utrecht, in 1610. Remonstrant Arminianism was debated in 1618–19 at the Synod of Dort (Dordrecht), an assembly of the Dutch Reformed Church. The synod included delegates from Reformed churches in England, Germany, and Switzerland as well as delegates from the Dutch church, all of whom were supporters of Gomarus. Arminianism was discredited and condemned by the synod, the Arminians present were expelled, and many others suffered persecution.
In 1629, however, the works of Arminius (Opera theologica [“Theological Works”]) were published for the first time, in Leiden, and by 1630 the Remonstrant Brotherhood had achieved legal toleration. It was finally recognized officially in the Netherlands in 1795. In its emphasis on the grace of God, Arminianism influenced the development of Methodism in England and the United States.
