James Cardinal Gibbons, original name James Gibbons,  (born July 23, 1834, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.—died March 24, 1921, Baltimore), American prelate who, as archbishop of Baltimore from 1877 to 1921, served as a bridge between Roman Catholicism and American Catholic values.
Gibbons was taken by his parents from Baltimore to Ireland in 1837. He returned to the United States 10 years later and spent the next eight years as a grocer in New Orleans. In 1855 he entered a seminary in Baltimore, and he became a priest in 1861. He rose through the ranks of the Roman Catholic Church quickly, and by 1868 he was the youngest bishop in the United States. During a short stay in North Carolina, Gibbons wrote Faith of Our Fathers (1876), a defense of Catholicism that proved exceptionally popular, selling more than two million copies. Gibbons was elevated to archbishop of Baltimore in 1877. He assumed a leadership role as the presiding prelate at the Third Plenary Council of Baltimore in 1884, and in 1886 he was made a cardinal by Pope Leo XIII.
As a leader of the Catholic church hierarchy in the United States, Gibbons was outspoken in his praise for American democratic institutions, and he advocated Americanization—the rapid assimilation of Catholic immigrants into American culture and institutions—both as a means to counter Protestant Americans’ suspicions toward Catholics and to avoid the fragmentation of the Catholic church in the United States along ethnic lines. Gibbons was also sympathetic to the cause of organized labour and worked to overcome suspicions within the Catholic church toward the Knights of Labor, which had been considered a secret society by many clergymen.
On education, as on other social issues, Gibbons sought ways of harmonizing the tenets of the Catholic faith with the principles of American democracy. Gibbons entered the controversy over control of parochial and public schools in 1891 when he defended Archbishop John Ireland’s experimental plan for cooperation between Catholic and public schools in the Minnesota towns of Faribault and Stillwater. To the dismay of conservative bishops, Gibbons refused to condemn public education and encouraged efforts to find common ground between the two systems. The Faribault-Stillwater plan remained controversial despite Gibbons’s support, and acrimony between the plan’s supporters and conservative opponents lingered until 1893.
Throughout his career Gibbons was a respected and influential public figure. Although nonpartisan, he took positions on a variety of foreign and domestic policy issues and was personally acquainted with every U.S. president from Andrew Johnson to Woodrow Wilson.
