Jan Rokycana, Czech Jan z Rokycan,  (born c. 1390, Rokycany, Bohemia—died  Feb. 22, 1471, Prague), priest, archbishop, and follower of Jan Hus (1372/73–1415); he was a chief organizer of the papally denounced Hussite Church and a major figure in Bohemian church history.
Rokycana went to Prague probably in 1410, assisting and later succeeding Jakoubek of Stříbro as organizer of the Hussites. Gaining a reputation as a powerful preacher, Rokycana was made minister of the largest church in Prague in 1423. The next year he negotiated a peace with the Orphans, a left-wing group of Hussites, and in 1432 became their leader.
The Hussites differed with Roman Catholics in particular by asserting that the Eucharist should be given to the laity in both elements of bread and wine, rather than in bread only, as Catholics believed, and in 1433 the Council of Basel was arranged to negotiate the differences. Rokycana, as spokesman for the large Hussite delegation that wanted Roman recognition of the Hussite Church as the sole national Czech church, enabled passage of the Prague articles of agreement. Later called the Prague Compactata, the agreement was ratified by the Bohemian emperor Sigismund. In 1435 Rokycana was made archbishop of the Hussite Church, and in 1436 he signed the Compactata in its name. Sigismund, however, was unfriendly to the Hussites and in 1437 drove Rokycana from Prague. Unable to return until 1448, Rokycana finally achieved general acceptance with the help of George of Poděbrady, who led the Hussites of Prague in Rokycana’s absence. When George was elected king of Bohemia in 1458, the security of the Hussite Church was assured in Bohemia, but the papacy was provoked. In 1462 Pope Pius II revoked the peace agreement of 1436, and his successor, Paul II, declared a crusade in 1467 against the Hussites. When both Rokycana and the King died in 1471, the Hussites were still unconquered, and in the remaining battles the papacy was routed. As the first national church that the papacy was unable to restrain or to conquer, the Hussite Church became an ideal for the churches of the Protestant Reformation a half century later.
