Jemima Wilkinson, also called (from October 1776) Publick Universal Friend,  (born November 29, 1752, Cumberland, Rhode Island [U.S.]—died July 1, 1819, near present-day Penn Yan, New York, U.S.), American religious leader who founded an unorthodox Christian sect, the Universal Friends, many of whose adherents declared her a messiah.
Wilkinson grew up in a Quaker family and early displayed a strong interest in religion. Her attendance at meetings of a New Light Baptist congregation in the aftermath of George Whitefield’s final revival tour of New England led to her dismissal from her Friends meeting in August 1776. Two months later she fell ill of a fever from which she emerged with the conviction, conveyed to her in a vision, that she had died and had been sent back as a spirit to preach to a “lost and guilty, gossiping, dying World.” She took the name Publick Universal Friend and thereafter answered to no other. The Publick Universal Friend was said to be neither male nor female, but both Wilkinson and the followers of the Friend used male pronouns to refer to him. Indeed, the single published work by the Friend was signed, “your friend and brother,” and the Friend and various female followers commonly adopted more masculine dress.
The Friend began to travel and preach throughout southern New England, and by the power of his personality and his commanding figure, more than through the rather conventional message of repentance, soon attracted a following. Many of Wilkinson’s own family members also left the Quaker faith to follow the Friend, which some scholars have argued points to the power of Jemima’s transformation into the Friend. The followers also included a number of influential persons, one of whom, Judge William Potter of South Kingstown, Rhode Island, freed his slaves, abandoned his political career, and built a large addition to his mansion for the Friend’s use. Meetinghouses were built by his followers, known collectively as Universal Friends, in East Greenwich, Rhode Island, and in New Milford, Connecticut. By 1782 his preaching had extended as far as Philadelphia, where The Universal Friend’s Advice to Those of the Same Religious Society, largely a compilation of biblical quotations for use in meetings, was published in 1784.
Whereas Wilkinson was discreetly vague about the exact nature of the Friend’s mission and his relation to divinity, many of the followers openly proclaimed the Friend to be a messiah, a practice that roused considerable animosity against the Universal Friends and their leader by orthodox churches. In 1788 some members of the sect, having scouted out the Genesee country of western New York, began a settlement near Seneca Lake. In 1790 the Friend arrived at the “Friend’s Settlement,” which then had a population of 260. In 1794 the Friend moved a few miles west, to the vicinity of Crooked (now Keuka) Lake where, with a small band of the most devoted followers, the Jerusalem township was established. In later years the Friend’s Settlement was disturbed by conflicts over ownership of the land, and outside the settlement numerous tales of dictatorial rule, harsh punishments, sexual misconduct, and other strange practices circulated widely among hostile observers.
The sect disintegrated a few years after the Friend “left time” again in 1819.
