Jibrīl, also spelled Jabrāʾīl or Jibreel,  in Islam, the archangel who acts as intermediary between God and humans and as bearer of revelation to the prophets, most notably to Muhammad. In biblical literature Gabriel is the counterpart to Jibrīl.
Muhammad was not initially aware that Gabriel was his intermediary, and the Qurʾān mentions him by name only three times. It is clear from the Sunnah and tafsīr literature, however, that Jibrīl became Muhammad’s constant helper. He and the archangel Mīkāl purified Muhammad’s heart in preparation for the Prophet’s ascension to heaven (Miʿrāj), and then Jibrīl guided him through the various levels until they reached the throne of God. Jibrīl also helped Muhammad in times of political crises, coming to his aid at the Battle of Badr (624) with thousands of angels, and then telling him to attack the Jewish tribes of Banū Qaynuqāʿ and Banū Qurayẓah, who had resisted Muhammad’s leadership in Medina.
Muhammad generally only heard the voice of his inspiration, but, according to ʿĀʾishah, his wife, he saw Jibrīl twice “in the shape that he was created,” and on other occasions he took on a form resembling Diḥyah ibn Khalīfah al-Kalbī, an extraordinarily handsome disciple of Muhammad. Others have described the archangel as having 600 wings, each pair so enormous that they crowd the space between East and West. Jibrīl has also been depicted as sitting on a chair suspended between heaven and earth. The popular image of Jibrīl is of an ordinary turbaned man, dressed in two green garments, astride a horse or a mule.
Islamic traditions concerning Jibrīl largely concur with biblical accounts of Gabriel, but his special relationship with Muhammad has inspired a mass of mythical detail. Jibrīl is said to have appeared at Adam’s side after his expulsion from paradise and shown him how to write, work iron, and raise wheat. Jibrīl later appeared in Egypt to help Moses and to deceive the Egyptians into entering the Red Sea in pursuit of the Jews. The invocation of Jibrīl and the other archangels also figures prominently in certain folk practices.
