Jinja,   in the Shintō religion of Japan, the place where the spirit of a deity is enshrined or to which it is summoned. Historically, jinja were located in places of great natural beauty; in modern times, however, urban shrines have become common. Though they may vary from large complexes of buildings to small, obscure roadside places of prayer, they generally consist of three units: (1) the honden (also called shinden), the main sanctuary, where the spirit of the deity is enshrined, normally approached only by the priests; (2) the heiden (hall of offerings), or norito-den (hall for reciting prayers), where religious rites are performed by the priests; here are offered the prayers which “call down” the kami (deity, or sacred power) and subsequently send it away; and (3) the haiden (hall of worship), where the devotees worship and offer prayers. Large shrines may have additional structures, such as the kagura-den (stage for ceremonial dance), shamusho (shrine office), temizu-ya (ablution basin for washing hands and mouth before worshiping), and also komainu (statues of guardian animals) and tōrō (stone or bronze lanterns given as offerings). The sacred compound is demarcated by an entrance gateway, or torii.
Some of the most famous Shintō shrines, such as the Inner Shrine (Naikū) at the Ise Shrine, are rebuilt at regular intervals, retaining through each reconstruction original elements of great antiquity, such as frames, floors, or roof beams. A distinctive feature of Shintō architecture is the chigi, a scissors-shaped finial formed by the projecting ends of the bargeboards at the front and rear of the roof.
From the Meiji Restoration in 1868 to the end of World War II, Shintō shrines were governed by the home ministry and subsidized by government funds. Following the disestablishment of State Shintō, and the constitutional prohibition of subsidies, the shrines have depended for support on the offerings of their parishioners and other worshipers and on revenue from tourism and local services such as kindergartens. Many priests work at second jobs to maintain themselves and their families. Most of the more than 97,000 shrines in Japan belong to the Jinja Honchō (Association of Shintō Shrines); its membership includes the majority of Japan’s 107,000,000 Shintō worshipers. Each shrine is managed by its own shrine committee, made up of priests and parishioners or their representatives. 
