Johann Eck, original name Johann Maier,  (born Nov. 13, 1486, Egg, Swabia [Germany]—died  Feb. 10, 1543, Ingolstadt, Bavaria [Germany]), German theologian who was Martin Luther’s principal Roman Catholic opponent.
Early in his career Maier adopted the name of his home village, Egg (or Eck), as his surname. He studied at the universities of Heidelberg, Tübingen, Cologne, and Freiburg im Breisgau. He was ordained to the priesthood in 1508 and became a doctor of theology in 1510. In that year he began a lifelong career as professor of theology at the University of Ingolstadt. Eck’s early treatises attracted attention, among them one of the first theses (1514) attacking the medieval prohibition against charging interest on money.
Eck was friendly with Martin Luther until the appearance in 1517 of the latter’s Ninety-five Theses, which Eck assailed as heretical in a tract published in 1518. In the celebrated Leipzig disputation of 1519, Eck debated with Luther and his disciple, Andreas Karlstadt, on such topics as papal primacy and the infallibility of church councils. In 1520 Eck visited Rome, where he helped compose the papal bull Exsurge Domine (June 1520), in which Pope Leo X condemned 41 of Luther’s theses and threatened the latter with excommunication. Leo X then commissioned Eck to publish and enforce the new papal bull throughout Germany.
Eck went on to write extensively in defense of papal authority and traditional doctrine. Traveling throughout Europe, he organized Roman Catholic opposition to German Protestantism, and he drafted the Catholic refutation (1530) of the Lutheran creed contained in the Augsburg Confession. He was the main Catholic polemicist in public debates with the Reformers John Oecolampadius in Baden (1526) and Philipp Melanchthon in Worms (1541).
Eck was a prolific writer in Latin, and his many works in that language are notable as learned defenses of the Roman Catholic faith. His treatise entitled Enchiridion Against the Lutherans (1525) was a summary of contested Catholic beliefs, Protestant objections to them, and answers to these difficulties. The Enchiridion proved to be the most popular of Eck’s works and went through 91 editions in various languages before 1600, making it the best-known Catholic polemical handbook of the 16th century. Eck’s German-language translation of the Bible (1537), which he produced for Roman Catholics, was largely unsuccessful, however.
