Murray, John Courtney,  (born Sept. 12, 1904, New York, N.Y., U.S.—died Aug. 16, 1967, New York City), , Jesuit (Society of Jesus) theologian known for his influential thought on church-state relations.
Murray was educated at a Jesuit high school in Manhattan and entered their novitiate in 1920. After study at Boston College, where he took his M.A., he attended Woodstock College (later the Woodstock Theological Center of Georgetown University). He was ordained in 1933. After study in Rome he became a member of the faculty of Woodstock College in 1936, a position he held until his death.
In the late 1940s Murray began to grapple with the problem of how the beliefs of a pluralistic, democratic society such as that of the United States could be integrated into the teachings of the Roman Catholic church. Murray was an outspoken opponent of censorship on the part of the Vatican, and, indeed, was opposed to any effort by the church to bring about change within states by means other than moral persuasion. Many of his writings on these topics first appeared in Theological Studies, a quarterly journal published by Woodstock College, of which Murray became editor in 1941. By the mid-1950s he was forbidden by the Jesuit order to write on topics pertaining to religious freedom and issues of church and state without first having it approved by the head of the order in Rome.
In 1958, John F. Kennedy, a Roman Catholic, won reelection to the U.S. Senate in a landslide victory and would later enter the race for the U.S. presidency at a time when faithful Roman Catholics were expected to work toward changing the constitution of any country that did not have Roman Catholicism as the established religion. Murray became a defender of the U.S. constitution, arguing that democracy and pluralism were not only good for the state and its citizens, but good for the church as well. The American political system, Murray argued, freed the church of the need to placate rulers of states and accorded the church and its members a new-found dignity. Murray’s 1960 book on this topic, We Hold These Truths, laid the groundwork for many changes in the way that church-state relations were viewed, by Catholics and non-Catholics alike.
By 1965 the Catholic hierarchy had changed its mind about Murray; he was invited to serve at the second Vatican Council and is credited as the chief author of that council’s Declaration on Religious Liberty. In 1966 he was made director of the John La Farge Institute, affiliated with the Jesuit weekly America. There he began holding seminars including Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish theologians, aimed at stimulating ecumenical dialogue.
