John Milíč, in full John Milíč of Kroměříž, Czech Jan Milíč z Kroměříže,  (born c. 1305, Kroměříž, Bohemia [now in Czech Republic]—died June 29, 1374, Avignon, France), theologian, orator, and reformer, considered to be the founder of the national Bohemian religious reform movement.
Milíč was educated at Prague and ordained about 1350, entering the imperial chancery of Charles IV in 1358. Later, he received a clerical benefice from Pope Innocent VI and was made a minor prelate and treasurer of St. Vitus’ Cathedral in Prague. Inspired by the spirit of reform and repelled by clerical corruption, Milíč resigned his office in 1363 and went into seclusion.
When he emerged, he devoted himself to preaching the tenets of church reform, asceticism, and ecclesiastic and secular poverty. He attacked the secularization of the Roman Catholic church and emphasized the Scriptures as a rule for life, preaching in Czech and German rather than the traditional Latin. His use of the vernacular and his reforming zeal soon gained him wide popularity among the laity.
Convinced that the degenerate state of the church and society portended an imminent end of the world and the coming of the Antichrist, Milíč traveled to Rome in the spring of 1367 and preached penance and moral conversion before the papal court. For his efforts, he was imprisoned by the Inquisition on suspicion of heresy but was released by Pope Urban V when the latter returned from Avignon in October. Late in 1367 he presented Urban with his pamphlet Libellus de Antichristo (“Booklet on Antichrist”), in which he urged the pope to convene a general council to reform the church.
Milíč then returned to Prague, where he began preaching daily sermons at the cathedral, in Latin for the clergy and in Czech for the people. His sermons were widely distributed throughout central Europe and spurred demands for Christian reform. At several centres he established at Prague, Milíč introduced the devotio moderna, a reform of prayer developed in Holland that emphasized a method of devotion centred on Christ (Christocentric) and intended to involve the emotions—as opposed to the academic and abstract forms of medieval scholastic theology.
When new charges of heresy were drawn up against him, Milíč, supported by the Holy Roman emperor and by Archbishop John of Jenstein, submitted his case to Pope Gregory XI at Avignon in 1373. Absolved of all charges, he was invited by the pope to preach to the College of Cardinals. He became ill and died the following year before he could return to Prague. Although Milíč remained within the Roman Catholic church, he is considered the forerunner of the Bohemian Reformation because of his attempted clerical reforms, his support for a vernacular Bible and vernacular preaching, and his doctrinal influence on Jan Hus.
