John Colenso,  (born Jan. 24, 1814, St. Austell, Cornwall, Eng.—died  June 20, 1883, Durban, Natal [now in South Africa]), controversial liberal Anglican bishop of Natal. He made numerous converts among the Zulus, who caused him to abandon certain religious tenets and thus be subjected to trial for heresy.
Colenso became rector of Forncett St. Mary’s Church, Norfolk, in 1846 and in 1853 bishop of Natal, where he served until his death. A strict logician, he was led by questions asked by Zulu converts to doubt the historical accuracy of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Old Testament. Arguing that the Pentateuch must have been a postexilic forgery rather than a faithful contemporary account of Jewish life, he also maintained that the numerical discrepancies found in Genesis warranted doubts concerning the historical accuracy of the Bible. For this position, presented in his Pentateuch and Book of Joshua Critically Examined (1862–79), for his opposition to the doctrine of eternal punishment for sinners, and for his toleration of polygamy among the Zulus, Colenso was summoned in 1863 by his superior, Bishop Robert Gray of Cape Town, to appear before him on a charge of heresy. Colenso was convicted the next year, but in 1865 he was acquitted on appeal by the judicial committee of the church Privy Council in England, which held that because the crown was powerless to appoint a bishop in a colony possessing its own independent legislature, the royal courts could not uphold the legality of Gray’s authority.
In 1866 Colenso’s right to his episcopal income was confirmed. Nevertheless, his victories were purely technical, for royal supremacy was subsequently declared invalid in South Africa. Gray’s religious authority increased despite his loss of legal authority, and after the church in South Africa was recognized as autonomous, the English bishops deposed Colenso in 1869. Colenso remained at his post, beside the new bishop, ministering to a dwindling band of supporters. He also composed a grammar, a dictionary, and a New Testament translation in Zulu.
