John Carroll,  (born Jan. 8, 1735, Upper Marlboro, Maryland [now in the U.S.]—died  Dec. 3, 1815, Baltimore), first Roman Catholic bishop in the United States and the first archbishop of Baltimore. Under his leadership the Roman Catholic church became firmly established in the United States.
Carroll was the son of a prominent Maryland family. Because there were no schools for the training of priests in the American colonies, he was sent abroad for his education, first to France and then to Belgium, where he was ordained (c. 1767). He taught philosophy and theology at the Jesuit colleges in Liège and Bruges, but the suppression of Jesuits by the papal brief of July 1773, vigorously enforced on the Continent, prompted him to seek refuge in England. By that time, however, the deteriorating relations between England and the Colonies were evident, and, sensing the climate of unrest, Carroll returned to Baltimore in the spring of 1774.
In the post-Revolutionary years, Carroll, who did not take an active part in the war, was instrumental in the reorganization of American Roman Catholics, no longer under the jurisdiction of the English church, and in efforts to establish satisfactory relations with Rome. On Nov. 6, 1789, he was appointed bishop of Baltimore—a diocese at that time encompassing the entire United States; he was consecrated the following year. He worked for the establishment in the United States of institutions for the training and ordination of native-born priests. In 1791 he founded the Sulpician seminary in Baltimore. He also encouraged Roman Catholic religious orders to establish branches in the United States, and, with the aid of George Washington, he secured federal funds for missionaries to the Indians of the West. In 1806 Carroll laid the cornerstone of the Baltimore cathedral, having collaborated with Benjamin Latrobe in the planning and design of the building. Following the erection of four new sees (Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Bardstown, Ky.) in 1808, Carroll became archbishop (1811). During his years as head of the American church, the Roman Catholic population of the country grew from about 25,000 to 200,000.
