Joseph ben Ephraim Karo, Karo also spelled Caro, or Qaro, also called Maran (Aramaic: “Our Master”),  (born 1488, Spain—died March 24, 1575, Safed, Palestine [now Ẕefat, Israel]), Spanish-born Jewish author of the last great codification of Jewish law, the Bet Yosef (“House of Joseph”). Its condensation, the Shulḥan ʿarukh (“The Prepared Table,” or “The Well-Laid Table”), is still authoritative for Orthodox Jewry.
When the Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492, Karo and his parents settled in Turkey. About 1536 he emigrated to Safed in Palestine, then the centre for students of the Talmud (the rabbinical compendium of law, lore, and commentary) and the Kabbala (the influential body of Jewish mystical writings).
Because of the partial disintegration in Jewish life after the Spanish expulsion, and the diversity of Talmudic authorities in different countries, Karo undertook two major works to standardize Judaism’s customs and laws, many derived from the Talmud. The first and greater of his works was the commentary Bet Yosef on the codification Arbaʿa ṭurim (1475; “Four Rows”) of Jacob ben Asher. Following Asher’s topical arrangement, Karo brought together the legal decisions of three leading representative Talmudists: Moses Maimonides, Isaac Alfasi, and Asher ben Jehiel. When he found disagreement among the three, Karo took the majority opinion as final. That procedure, however, gave a Sephardic bias to the work, because Maimonides and Alfasi usually agreed and both were Sephardic—i.e., Jews of Spanish and Portuguese descent. In addition, Karo often decided difficult points of law on his own authority. In the scope of sources used, Bet Yosef went far beyond the code of Maimonides (chiefly confined to the Talmud) and systematized the vast body of material produced by post-Talmudic rabbinical writers.
Because of the complexity and erudition of the Bet Yosef, Karo produced a popular condensation, Shulḥan ʿarukh (1564–65), which provoked the strictures of Moses Isserles, a learned Polish rabbi. Isserles objected to the work’s Sephardic bias as slighting the customs of the Ashkenazim (Jews of German and Polish descent). A corrective commentary by Isserles, Mappa (1571; “The Tablecloth”), made Karo’s code acceptable to Sephardic and Ashkenazic Jews alike. Since that time the commentary has been published with Karo’s digest.
Karo was also the author of another major work, a strange, mystical diary, entitled Maggid mesharim (1646; “Preacher of Righteousness”), in which he recorded the nocturnal visits of an angelic being, the personification of the Mishna (the authoritative collection of Jewish Oral Law). His visitor spurred him to acts of righteousness and even asceticism, exhorted him to study the Kabbala, and reproved him for moral laxities.
