Karen Armstrong,  (born November 14, 1944, Worcestershire, England), English author of books on religion who was widely regarded as one of the leading commentators on the subject.
At age 17 Armstrong entered a Roman Catholic convent. Though she had “pictured the religious life as a series of philosophical conversations sandwiched between prayerful ecstasies,” she was rudely awakened. She entered the convent just as the Second Vatican Council was getting underway, long before its reforms were introduced into Roman Catholic institutions. Armstrong found herself searching for God in the midst of the severe and outdated Victorian subculture of her convent. After seven years in the convent she emerged a nonbeliever, and she recounted her journey in the autobiographical Through the Narrow Gate (1981).
Armstrong graduated from the University of Oxford with a degree in literature. She then taught modern literature at the University of London before becoming the head of the English department at a girls’ school. By 1982 she had become a freelance writer and broadcaster, and her new profession gradually led her back to the subject of religion. She began describing herself as a “freelance monotheist.” In 1983 she wrote and presented a six-part television documentary series on the life and work of the Apostle Paul. Much of the background work for the series was done on-site in the Middle East, where Armstrong gained a fresh appreciation for Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. She then went on to produce other television series, including Varieties of Religious Experience (1984), Tongues of Fire (1985), and Genesis: A Living Conversation (1996). A teacher at the Leo Baeck College for the Study of Judaism and the Training of Rabbis and Teachers, she was also an honorary member of the Association of Muslim Social Scientists.
Armstrong’s books included Beginning the World (1983), The Gospel According to Woman: Christianity’s Creation of the Sex War in the West (1986), Muhammad: A Western Attempt to Understand Islam (1991), The End of Silence: Women and the Priesthood (1993), A History of God: The 4,000-Year Quest of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (1993), The Battle for God: Fundamentalism in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (2000), The Great Transformation: The Beginning of Our Religious Traditions (2006), The Case for God (2009), Fields of Blood: Religion and the History of Violence (2014), and The Lost Art of Scripture: Rescuing the Sacred Texts (2019).
Armstrong was named an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2015.
