Laura Maria Sheldon Wright, née Laura Maria Sheldon,  (born July 10, 1809, St. Johnsbury, Vt., U.S.—died Jan. 21, 1886, near Iroquois, N.Y.), American missionary who devoted her energies unstintingly to the education and welfare of the Seneca people, honouring their culture while assisting in their adjustment to reservation life.
Laura Sheldon played as a child with local Native American children, among whom she began holding prayer meetings at age 10. After completing her formal education in local schools, she became a schoolteacher. In 1833 she married the Reverend Asher Wright, a missionary to the Seneca Indians in western New York. Taking up her husband’s work at the Buffalo Creek reservation, she soon mastered the Seneca language. Over the years she became a respected and much-loved figure among Indians. Using a Seneca alphabet devised by her husband, she taught the children to read and write from a series of schoolbooks she produced, including a primer printed in 1836, a speller in 1842, and a bilingual journal that appeared regularly between 1841 and 1850.
The Wrights laboured to help the Seneca make the difficult transition from a hunting culture to a settled agrarian one, a task greatly complicated by the loss of Buffalo Creek reservation to the encroachment of land developers from the growing city of Buffalo. The extreme hardships, including starvation and epidemic disease, that followed upon the removal of the Seneca to the Cattaraugus reservation—the Wrights’ mission moved there in 1845—orphaned scores of Seneca children. Wright took many of them into her home and in 1854 prevailed upon Philip E. Thomas, a wealthy Quaker merchant of Baltimore, Maryland, to establish the Thomas Asylum for Orphan and Destitute Indian Children (later the Thomas Indian School), of which the Wrights served thereafter as codirectors. Wright was known among the Seneca as Auntie Wright. She performed countless acts of charity, always respecting Seneca customs. From her husband’s death in 1875, she lived in the home of Nicholson H. Parker (of the distinguished Seneca family that also produced General Ely S. Parker).
