Leopold Zunz, Hebrew Yom-tob Lippmann,  (born Aug. 10, 1794, Detmold, Lippe [now in Germany]—died  March 18, 1886, Berlin, Ger.), German historian of Jewish literature who is often considered the greatest Jewish scholar of the 19th century. He began (1819) the movement called Wissenschaft des Judentums (“Science of Judaism”), which stressed the analysis of Jewish literature and culture with the tools of modern scholarship.
Zunz studied classics and history at Berlin University, although he took his doctorate at the University of Halle (1821). Much of his life afterward was a precarious struggle with poverty. He served as a lay preacher for a congregation and worked as a newspaper editor (1824–31) and later as a teacher and principal at the Jewish teachers seminary in Berlin (1840–50).
The Science of Judaism was initiated with his seminal work, Etwas über die rabbinische Litteratur (1818; “On Rabbinic Literature”), which revealed to the interested public, for the first time, the scope and beauty of postbiblical Jewish literature. In 1819, with the noted jurist Eduard Gans and a merchant and mathematician, Moses Moser, Zunz founded the Verein für Kultur und Wissenschaft der Juden (“Society for Jewish Culture and Science”). He and his colleagues hoped that an analysis and exposition of the breadth and depth of Jewish history, literature, and culture would lead to general acceptance of the Jews. From 1822 to 1823, Zunz edited the Society’s Zeitschrift (periodical), to which he contributed a classic biography of Rashi, the great medieval commentator on biblical and rabbinical texts. When the society disbanded in 1824, he continued its work alone.
Zunz’s Gottesdienstlichen Vorträge der Juden, historisch entwickelt (1832; “The Worship Sermons of the Jews, Historically Developed”) is a historical analysis of Jewish homiletical literature and its evolutionary development up to the modern-day sermon. His revelations of the cultural depth of Jewish civilization in the European Middle Ages refuted the views of those who held that Jewish culture and learning ended with the biblical period.
Zur Geschichte und Literatur (1845; “On History and Literature”) was a wide-ranging work that placed the gamut of Jewish literary activity in the context of European literature and politics. Zunz wrote three important works on the liturgies of Judaism and served as editor in chief of a translation of the Bible (1838), for which he translated the Books of Chronicles. In his last years he wrote a series of essays on the Bible, collected in Gesammelte Schriften, 3 vol. (1875–76; “Collected Writings”).
