Li Hongzhi,  (born July 7, 1952, Jilin province, China), Chinese-born founder and leader of Falun Gong, a spiritual movement that won a wide following in China and elsewhere but was eventually condemned as a “heretical cult” by Chinese government officials.
In the late 1980s and early ’90s, China saw a resurgence in the popularity of qigong (literally, “discipline of the vital breath”)—various, often traditional, exercise practices designed to promote health by stimulating the flow of qi (life force; literally, “vital breath”) through the body. In 1992 Li, a qigong practitioner who had studied under Buddhist and Daoist masters, promoted his own version of qigong techniques, which drew upon Buddhist and Daoist concepts of self-cultivation. In Zhuan falun (1994; Eng. trans. “The Revolving Dharma Wheel”), a compilation of his lectures that served as the main text for his methodology, he called for spiritual enlightenment through meditation and striving toward high moral standards. Shortly after publishing Zhuan falun, Li announced that he had completed his teachings in China. He began to travel extensively, making guest appearances at conferences in support of his techniques. Li became a U.S. citizen in 1997 and moved to New York, New York, in 1998.
Falun Gong became popular in the 1990s largely because many followers claimed to have been healed of diseases that modern Western medicine could not treat. The number of followers grew rapidly; in 1999 Li estimated that there were about 100 million Falun Gong practitioners throughout the world. Meanwhile, Zhuan falun had been translated into nine languages.
The Chinese government, however, became increasingly nervous about Falun Gong’s popularity. Government officials feared that Li’s movement could inspire a revolutionary challenge to the standing order. On April 25, 1999, thousands of Falun Gong practitioners protested in Beijing against criticism of the movement in the Chinese media. Three months later, Chinese Pres. Jiang Zemin declared the practitioners of Falun Gong a threat to the government and issued a warrant for Li’s arrest. He detained thousands of Li’s followers, some of whom were officials in the Chinese Communist Party. Millions of Li’s books and cassette tapes were destroyed in the crackdown.
Living in the United States, Li called for dialogue with the Chinese government to resolve the crisis. His teachings continued to be relayed in books and on audiotapes. His movement sponsored a free newspaper (Epoch Times), Chinese-language television (New Tang Dynasty) and radio (Sound of Hope) networks, and Shen Yun, a Chinese New Year extravaganza held in major cities throughout the world.
