Lord’s Prayer, also called Our Father, Latin Oratio Dominica or Pater Noster,  Christian prayer that, according to tradition, was taught by Jesus to his disciples. It appears in two forms in the New Testament: the shorter version in the Gospel According to Luke 11:2–4 and the longer version, part of the Sermon on the Mount, in the Gospel According to Matthew 6:9–13. In both contexts it is offered as a model of how to pray.
The Lord’s Prayer resembles other prayers that came out of the Jewish matrix of Jesus’ time and contains three common elements of Jewish prayers: praise, petition, and a yearning for the coming kingdom of God. It consists of an introductory address and seven petitions. The Matthean version used by the Roman Catholic Church is as follows:
The English version of the Lord’s Prayer used in many Protestant churches replaces the lines “and forgive us our trespasses / as we forgive those who trespass against us” with:
Protestants also add the following conclusion:
This concluding doxology (short formula of praise) in the Protestant version was probably added early in the Christian era, since it occurs in some early manuscripts of the Gospels.
Biblical scholars disagree about Jesus’ meaning in the Lord’s Prayer. Some view it as “existential,” referring to present human experience on earth, while others interpret it as eschatological, referring to the coming kingdom of God. The prayer lends itself to both interpretations, and further questions are posed by the existence of different translations and the problems inherent in the process of translation. In the case of the term daily bread, for example, the Greek word epiousion, which modifies bread, has no known parallels in Greek writing and may have meant “for tomorrow.” The petition “Give us this day our daily bread” may thus be given the eschatological interpretation “Give us today a foretaste of the heavenly banquet to come.” This interpretation is supported by Ethiopic versions and by St. Jerome’s reference to the reading “bread of the future” in the lost Gospel According to the Hebrews. The eschatological interpretation suggests that the Lord’s Prayer may have been used in a eucharistic setting in the early church; the prayer is recited before the Eucharist in most Christian traditions.
