Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod,  conservative Lutheran church in the United States, organized in Chicago in 1847 by German immigrants from Saxony (settled in Missouri) and Bavaria (settled in Michigan and Indiana) as the German Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Missouri, Ohio, and Other States. C.F.W. Walther, a seminary professor and pastor ordained in Germany, was president of the church from 1847 to 1850 and from 1864 to 1878. The church grew rapidly through an active educational and evangelistic program, by absorbing entire congregations and synods, and by meeting newly arrived German immigrants in port cities to guide them into its congregations. “German” was dropped from the name in 1917, and in 1947 the present name was adopted.
The Missouri Synod has often been at odds with other Lutheran groups because of its insistence on strict conformity with its interpretation of “pure doctrine” based on the Bible and the Lutheran confessions. Until the 1960s it refused association and cooperation with all groups that it considered doctrinally in error. In 1872 it formed a loose federation (the Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference) with several small conservative Lutheran groups. In 1967, however, the conference dissolved when the Missouri Synod joined with the American Lutheran Church, the Lutheran Church in America, and the Synod of Evangelical Lutheran Churches (which in 1971 became part of the Missouri Synod) to form the Lutheran Council in the United States of America (LCUSA), a cooperative agency; the Missouri Synod, however, subsequently withdrew.
In the late 1960s and early ’70s the Missouri Synod experienced internal strife that led to an exodus of faculty and students from Concordia Seminary in St. Louis, Mo., in 1974 and the formation two years later of the Association of Evangelical Lutheran Churches by 100,000 Missouri Synod dissidents. At issue in the dispute were congregational autonomy versus synodical authority and the nature of the church’s mission. The Association of Evangelical Lutheran Churches also ordained women, while the Missouri Synod did not. In 1982 the new group voted to join with two other Lutheran bodies to begin planning the formation of what became in 1988 the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA).
The Missouri Synod is governed through a biennial general convention and several elected officers, including a president. Congregations are grouped in geographical districts. The church supports an extensive educational system that includes parochial schools, colleges, and seminaries. In 2005 the group reported about 2.4 million members and 6,144 congregations. Headquarters are in St. Louis, Mo.
In 1994 a related body, the Lutheran Church—Canada, reported more than 75,000 members and 329 congregations. Its headquarters are in Winnipeg, Man.
