Manual of Discipline, also called Rule Of The Community,  one of the most important documents produced by the Essene community of Jews, who settled at Qumrān in the Judaean desert in the early 2nd century bc. They did so to remove themselves from what they considered a corrupt religion symbolized by the religiopolitical high priests of the Hasmonean dynasty centred in Jerusalem. The major portion of the scroll was discovered in Cave I at Qumrān in 1947, and fragments of 11 other versions of the Manual were found in Caves IV and V the same year. Modern scholars have suggested that, when the Qumrān sect was forced to abandon its community life because of the great Jewish revolt against Rome in ad 66–70, its members hid their library in nearby caves. The large number of preserved manuscripts indicate the importance of the Manual to the Essene community.
This scroll was probably intended for the Essene sect’s leaders, including priests who supervised the sacrificial, liturgical, and possibly exegetical religious functions, and also guardians who controlled the admission and instruction of new members into the community. The document contains an explanation of the sect’s religious and moral ideals, a description of its admission ceremony, a long catechetical discourse on its mystical doctrine of the primordial spirits of truth and perversity, organizational and disciplinary statutes, and a final hymn or psalm praising obedience and setting forth the sacred seasons. The first of two appendices, the Rule of the Congregation, or “Messianic Rule,” contains additional statutes and instructions about a messianic feast. The second is a liturgical collection of benedictions: Blessings.
Although this work cannot be dated with precision, it was probably compiled after the community had settled in Qumrān. Some scholars have connected part of it to an enigmatic figure, the unknown Teacher of Righteousness, whose ministry within the community probably fell in the latter half of the 2nd century bc. See also Dead Sea Scrolls.
