Mariana Alcoforado,  (baptized April 22, 1640, Beja, Portugal—died July 28, 1723, Beja), Portuguese nun, long believed to have written Lettres portugaise (1669; “Portuguese Letters”), a collection of five love letters, though most modern authorities reject her authorship.
Alcoforado entered the convent of Nôtre Dame de la Conception in 1656 and became vice-abbess in 1709. The letters appeared in January 1669 in French, purportedly translated from lost originals. In a preface to the first edition, the publisher, Claude Barbin, claimed that they had been written to a “man of quality” but that he knew neither the name of the writer nor the name of the person to whom they were addressed. He gave no information about his sources, nor the name of the translator. The letters were extremely popular, not least because of the intrigue to which they referred: a French officer had seduced a nun of good family in a convent in the province of Alentejo. Fearing the consequences, he had returned hurriedly to France. The letters vividly describe the nun’s betrayed faith and disillusionment, and they were generally accepted as authentic at the time of their first publication.
In later editions the “man of quality” was identified as the “chevalier de C—” (taken to be the marquis de Chamilly) and the translator as “Guilleragues” (i.e., Gabriel Joseph de Lavergne, vicomte de Guilleragues). In 1810 the scholar J.F. Boissonade claimed to have a copy of the first edition in which, in an unknown hand, the name of the writer was given as “Mariana Alcoforado.” Later research proved that a nun called Maria Ana Alcoforado had been living at Beja in the 1660s. Despite certain inconsistencies, it was assumed that she was the author, until F.C. Green in 1926 found the original royal privilege (1668) that stated Guilleragues was the author, not the translator, of the Lettres portugaise. Despite this evidence, however, debate over their authorship continued into the 21st century.
The letters’ effects were great. They were praised for sincerity and passion by many—including Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon (who brought evidence to support the identification of Chamilly), Jean de La Bruyère, and Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve—and they influenced writers from Stendhal to Rainer Maria Rilke. Regardless of their authenticity, the Lettres portugaise remain a powerfully moving account of love and betrayal, and they were often republished throughout the 20th century, appearing in English translation under such titles as The Love Letters of a Portuguese Nun and Letters from a Portuguese Nun.
