Mary Daly,  (born Oct. 16, 1928, Schenectady, N.Y., U.S.—died Jan. 3, 2010, Gardner, Mass.), American theologian, philosopher, and ethicist who pioneered radical feminist theology.
Daly was born into a Roman Catholic family. After earning a Ph.D. in religion from St. Mary’s College (1953), she studied medieval philosophy and Thomist theology at the University of Fribourg, Switz., receiving doctorates in theology and philosophy. She joined the theology faculty at Boston College, a Catholic institution run by the Jesuit order, in 1967.
She had several clashes with the school’s administration over her policy of barring male students from her classrooms, a practice she justified as necessary to create a “safe space” in which women (including some survivors of domestic abuse) could speak comfortably and freely. In 1998 a male student backed by a conservative political organization sued the college when Daly refused to admit him into one of her classes. The college dismissed her and revoked her tenure, spurring a bitter legal battle; it was settled in 2001, when Daly agreed to retire.
Although she had received an education in traditional Catholic thought and was inspired by the Protestant theologian Paul Tillich, Daly increasingly identified herself as “post-Christian” as her own theology evolved. She drew from a deep knowledge of the Western tradition and exhibited a poetic use of etymological wordplay in developing her theoretical “exposé” of patriarchy, by which she meant both the systematic domination of women by men throughout society and the social and cultural institutions that serve to justify that domination. Rejecting traditional conceptions of a transcendent (and often male) God, Daly promoted a sense of the Absolute as a “Be-ing” that was not only immanent but actualized through women’s creativity. Daly’s works include The Church and the Second Sex (1968), Beyond God the Father: Toward a Philosophy of Women’s Liberation (1973), Gyn/ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism (1978), and Quintessence—Realizing the Archaic Future: A Radical Elemental Feminist Manifesto (1998).
