Matilda Coxe Stevenson, née Matilda Coxe Evans,  (born May 12, 1849, San Augustine, Texas, U.S.—died June 24, 1915, Oxon Hill, Md.), American ethnologist who became one of the major contributors to her field, particularly in the study of Zuni religion.
Matilda Evans grew up in Washington, D.C. She was educated at Miss Anable’s Academy in Philadelphia. In April 1872 she married James Stevenson, a geologist who, from 1879, was executive officer of the U.S. Geological Survey. She took an interest in her husband’s work, and in 1879 she accompanied him on an expedition to New Mexico to study the Zuni for the Bureau of American Ethnology.
For some years her assistance to her husband was largely unacknowledged, but in 1884 the British anthropologist Edward B. Tylor visited the Stevensons, discovered the extent of her original contributions, and publicly commented on her work. On several visits to the Zuni she studied their domestic life and in particular the roles, duties, and rituals of Zuni women. Her first major published paper, “Religious Life of the Zuñi Child,” appeared in the 1883–84 annual report of the Bureau of American Ethnology and opened an entirely new area of anthropology in the study of children. In 1885 she helped found and became first president of the Women’s Anthropological Society of America. In March 1888 her important paper on “Zuñi Religions” appeared in Science. On the death of her husband in July of that year she was appointed to the staff of the Bureau of American Ethnology.
In 1889 she undertook a study of the people of the Zia Pueblo in New Mexico, her report on which appeared in the 1889–90 volume of the bureau’s annual reports. The Zuni remained her principal interest, however. She was held in great esteem by them, and in consequence she was able to learn much that had been concealed from earlier investigators. The Twenty-Third Annual Report of the bureau in 1901–02 published her 600-page The Zuñi Indians: Their Mythology, Esoteric Fraternities, and Ceremonies, her most important written work. The Thirtieth Annual Report of 1908–09 printed her “Ethnobotany of the Zuñi Indians.” She also contributed to American Anthropologist and other journals, and her subjects later included the Taos and Tewa Indians as well. From 1904 to 1915 she lived near the San Ildefonso Pueblo in Sante Fe county, New Mexico; her health failed in the latter year, and she died shortly after returning east.
