Matsuri,   (Japanese: “festival”), in general, any of a wide variety of civil and religious ceremonies in Japan; more particularly, the shrine festivals of Shintō. Matsuri vary according to the shrine, the deity or sacred power (kami) worshipped, and the purpose and occasion of the ceremony and often are performed in accordance with traditions of great antiquity. The term matsuri-goto, which literally means “affairs of religious festivals,” in common usage also means “government.” This is in accordance with the tradition that the ceremonies of Shintō were the proper business of the state, and that all important aspects of public just as of private life were the occasions for prayers and reports to the kami. A matsuri generally falls into two parts: the solemn ritual of worship, followed by a joyous celebration.
The participants first purify themselves (see harai) by periods of abstinence, which may vary from a number of hours to days, and by bathing (misogi), preferably in salt water. The kami is then requested to descend into its symbol or object of residence (shintai) in an invocatory rite that consists of opening the inner doors of the shrine, beating a drum or ringing bells, and calling the kami to descend. Next the food offerings (shinsen) are presented and on occasion other offerings, heihaku (literally, “cloth,” but in modern usage including also paper, jewels, weapons, money, and utensils). Prayers (norito) are recited by the priests. Individual worshippers present offerings of branches of a sacred tree (tamagushi), and ceremonial music and dancing (gagaku and bugaku) are performed. The offerings are then withdrawn and the kami respectfully requested to retire.
The celebrations usually include a feast (naorai) in which the consecrated offerings of food and drink are consumed by priests and laymen, dancing, theatrical performances, divination, and athletic contests, such as sumo wrestling, archery, either on foot or on horseback, and boat races. The kami is frequently taken out in a procession in a portable shrine (mikoshi); thus its presence blesses the locations along its route. Accompanying it in the procession, which may commemorate some local historical event, are priests of the temple in full ceremonial dress; delegations of parishioners, musicians, and dancers dressed in ancient costumes; and floats (dashi). The floats are beautifully decorated cars shaped like mountains, shrines, or perhaps boats, either drawn by men or oxen or carried on men’s shoulders.
