Maximus Planudes, original name Manuel Planudes,  (born 1260, Nicomedia, Byzantine Empire [now İzmit, Turkey]—died c. 1310, Constantinople [now Istanbul]), Greek Orthodox humanities scholar, anthologist, and theological polemicist in the controversy between Byzantium and Rome. His Greek translations of works in classical Latin philosophy and literature and in Arabic mathematics publicized these areas of learning throughout the Greek Byzantine cultural world.
After entering political life in Constantinople, Planudes retired to a monastery in 1283 because of factional strife. He later returned to Constantinople, where he established a monastery for laymen and opened a school by the imperial library. Drawing students from the royal family and nobility, the school gained an academic reputation for its thorough humanities curriculum. Planudes’ eminence derived in large part from his competence in the Latin language. This linguistic ability prompted his appointment as the emperor Andronicus II Palaeologus’ emissary to Venice in 1295–96.
Among the Latin writings that Planudes translated into Greek were De Trinitate (“On the Trinity”) by the 5th-century Church Father Augustine of Hippo, and logical and theological tracts by the 6th-century philosopher-statesman Boethius. Equally significant were Planudes’ translations of the essays and rhetoric of Cicero and the poetry of Ovid.
A distinctive contribution to the history of Greek literature was Planudes’ revision of the Anthologia Hellēnikē (“Greek Anthology”), a renowned collection of Greek prose and poetry comprising authors from about 700 bc to ad 1000 and edited variously from the 1st to the 11th century. Although parts of the reconstituted texts show Planudes’ personal interpretations, the Anthologia, illustrating the continuity of Greek letters for almost 2,000 years, helped the development of modern Italian and French by its influence on 15th-century writers. Similarly, his revision of the Life and Fables of Aesop and his commentary on Theocritus, the 3rd-century-bc creator of Greek pastoral verse, assisted in popularizing this literature throughout Europe.
The evolution of mathematics in Byzantium, and subsequently in Europe, was stimulated by Planudes’ Psephophoria kat’ Indous (“Arithmetic According to the Indians” [i.e., Arabs]). Influenced by the Baghdad school, he encouraged the use of Arabic numerical notation, including the sign for zero, and introduced other mathematical operations (e.g., the extraction of square roots).
