Mayan calendar,  dating system of the ancient Mayan civilization and the basis for all other calendars used by Mesoamerican civilizations. The calendar was based on a ritual cycle of 260 named days and a year of 365 days. Taken together, they form a longer cycle of 18,980 days, or 52 years of 365 days, called a “Calendar Round.”
The original name of the 260-day cycle is unknown; it is variously referred to as the Tzolkin (“Count of Days”), divinatory calendar, ritual calendar, or simply the day calendar. Within the Tzolkin are two smaller cycles of days numbered from 1 to 13 and an ordered series of 20 named days. Although the names for the ritual days differed throughout Mesoamerica, scholars believe that the various calendars were synchronized based on their use in divination. In particular, each named day was thought to have certain fateful characteristics, but most of the details have been lost. Although the ritual day series was synchronized throughout Mesoamerica, the start of the 365-day year varied. The 365-day year was divided into 18 named months (uinals) of 20 days plus one month of 5 “nameless” days, called Uayeb. The nameless days were considered extremely unlucky, causing the Maya to observe them with fasting and sacrifices to deities. Each ordinary day had a fourfold designation—in order, day number and day name in the 260-day cycle and day number within the month and month name in the 365-day cycle. Thus, each of the 18,980 days in the Calendar Round had a unique designation (e.g., 12 Caban 15 Ceh).
The Maya erected stelae—i.e., stone slabs or pillars—on which they carved representative figures and important dates and events in their rulers’ lives. To describe a given date more accurately, the Maya instituted the “Long Count,” a continuous marking of time from a base date. Most historians think that 4 Ahau 8 Cumku (most likely August 11, 3114 bce) was the base date used by the Maya for the start of the “Long Count” and the first “Great Cycle,” a period of 5,125 years that ends on December 21, 2012 ce.
