Meir Of Rothenburg, original name Meir Ben Baruch,  (born c. 1215, Worms, Franconia [Germany]—died  May 2, 1293, Ensisheim Fortress, Alsace), great rabbinical authority of 13th-century German Jewry and one of the last great tosaphists (writers of notes and commentary) of Rashi’s authoritative commentary on the Talmud.
Meir studied in Germany and later in France, where he witnessed, in 1242 or 1244, the public burning of 24 cartloads of Talmudic manuscripts, a disaster that inspired him to write a moving poem. On returning to Germany, he was rabbi in many communities but probably spent the longest time in Rothenburg, where he opened a Talmudic school. He became famous as an authority on rabbinic law and for nearly half a century acted as the supreme court of appeals for Jews of Germany and surrounding countries. In practice he was a strict Talmudist.
In 1286, in addition to the other persecutions German Jews endured, Emperor Rudolph I attempted to abrogate their political freedom by making them servi camerae (“serfs of the treasury”). Many Jews tried to escape from Germany, including Rabbi Meir. While leading his family and a group of followers through Lombardy, he was apprehended and imprisoned for the rest of his life in an Alsatian fortress. Although the Jews raised a large ransom, it is generally believed that Meir refused it for fear of encouraging the government to imprison more rabbis for ransom. Fourteen years after his death, upon payment of a large ransom, his body was finally delivered for burial.
Although Meir wrote no single major work, his 1,500 or so extant responsa (authoritative answers to questions regarding Jewish law and ritual) are rich with information about the community organization and social customs of medieval German Jewry. He also wrote many erudite Talmudic tosaphoth (notes). His main teachings, however, were included in numerous literary compositions by his disciples, such as the famous codifier Asher ben Jehiel. These compositions became classical textbooks of law and ritual for Ashkenazic Jews (those of German–Polish descent) of all subsequent generations.
