Moravian church,  Protestant church founded in the 18th century but tracing its origin to the Unitas Fratrum (“Unity of Brethren”) of the 15th-century Hussite movement in Bohemia and Moravia.
Although suppressed during the Counter-Reformation and proscribed by the Peace of Westphalia (1648), the Brethren survived in Bohemia because of the efforts of a so-called “hidden seed” of loyal adherents. German Pietism in the late 17th century increased the unrest among the underground Protestants in Moravia and Bohemia, and many Brethren fled to Protestant Germany. Pietism also profoundly influenced many nobles, including a young count, Nikolaus Ludwig, Graf von Zinzendorf, who restored the hidden seed. A group adhering to the tradition of the Bohemian Brethren fled Moravia in 1722 and settled on the count’s estate in Saxony, where he had founded Herrnhut as a Christian community. Exiles from Bohemia and Moravia, as well as Pietists from Germany and beyond, were attracted to Herrnhut. The community held services at an assembly hall in Herrnhut and took the sacraments and worshiped in the Lutheran parish church in the nearby village of Berthelsdorf.
A devout Lutheran, Zinzendorf tried to keep the refugees within the state church. His aversion to apparent sectarianism was overcome when he realized that he faced the remnant of a church older than his own. Reluctantly, he helped them revive their own tradition. As a result, Herrnhut became the mother community of the Moravian church. It also became the centre for a network of Pietist conventicles working to nurture the spiritual life within the established Lutheran and Reformed churches. This latter phase of Moravianism came to be known as the “diaspora,” and its members far outnumbered those who belonged to the Moravian church itself.
Dissension within the community was dispelled at a special Communion service on August 13, 1727, which also created lasting evangelical zeal and later made Herrnhut the centre of a worldwide Christian outreach program. The diaspora Moravians began their evangelical work in 1727, and the first foreign missionaries left Herrnhut to work among black slaves in the West Indies in 1732. Within two decades there were missions to Greenland, Suriname, South Africa, Algiers, and among the North American Indians.
In 1735 David Nitschmann was consecrated the first bishop of the Renewed Moravian Church. With Nitschmann the Moravians restored their own ministry and soon thereafter the three orders of bishop, presbyter, and deacon.
Herrnhut became a unique community in which civic and church life were integrated into a theocratic society, a prototype for about 20 settlements in Europe, the British Isles, and America. These exclusive Moravian villages were characterized by Christian fellowship groups, daily worship featuring both vocal and instrumental music, boarding schools, and concentration on foreign and domestic evangelism. They supported themselves and their projects by thriving handicraft industries.
In 1734 Moravians en route to mission work in the American colonies arrived in London and made contacts that led to the formation of the Fetter Lane Society in 1738, the forerunner of churches in England, Wales, and Ireland. John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, met the Moravians during his trip to Georgia in 1735–36. Upon his return home, both he and his brother Charles affiliated with the Moravians. They worked together until 1740, when the Methodist and Moravian churches went their separate ways. The former became a mass movement, while the latter, after initial success, became one of the small churches of the British Isles, with about 40 congregations and fewer than 5,000 members.
The first Moravian mission in the Americas was among black slaves in the West Indies (1732). Later, in 1735, Moravian missionaries moved into Georgia but were unsuccessful. In 1740 the group went to Pennsylvania and founded Nazareth and Bethlehem. The prospect of organizing the many German settlers of Lutheran, Reformed, and sectarian background into a union church was an additional factor in Zinzendorf’s interest in Pennsylvania. He spent 14 months in America (1741–43), which he saw as a haven from possible suppression at home, and set up a program patterned after that of Europe. Although his plan of church union failed, Zinzendorf successfully established the Moravian church in the New World.
In Europe and America, Moravian churches varied: some were established in closed settlements of Moravians only, and others existed alongside several other denominations. For about a century, only church members lived in Bethlehem, Nazareth, and Lititz in Pennsylvania and in Salem (present-day Winston-Salem) in North Carolina. Moravians from Bethlehem founded the first of the North Carolina churches in 1753. Evangelical missions to Native Americans, neighbouring European settlers, and indigenous peoples overseas radiated from centres in Pennsylvania and North Carolina. Many children from outside the church, especially after the American Revolution, were educated in Moravian boarding schools. Despite this outreach, the church remained small because of European control and the tradition of founding closed communities. Extensive growth, however, occurred in the mid-19th century, when reorganization of the international Moravian Church gave the Americans more autonomy. Immigrants from Germany and Norway accounted for much of the growth in the North, while in North Carolina growth came largely from native population increase.
The Moravian Church in America was divided into northern and southern administrative provinces by 1771. In the late 20th century, the provinces shared a common board of foreign missions, a common seminary, and a free exchange of ministers. Salem College in Winston-Salem and Moravian College in Bethlehem were two of the church-related schools. Another U.S. Moravian group, the Unity of the Brethren, had close relations with the Moravian church and cooperated in missions overseas.
The Moravian church is divided into self-governing regional administrative units that are organized around a provincial synod administered by a provincial elders’ conference. The churches are linked by a general synod of elected representatives that meets every 10 years and is authoritative in all matters of doctrine and organization. The power to ordain in the Moravian church is reserved for the bishops, but the episcopal office does not in itself have an administrative function. In practice, however, bishops more often than not are elected to administrative office. The church is organized into 19 autonomous provinces, representatives of which meet every two years at the Unity Synod. There were approximately 600,000 members of the Moravian church at the turn of the 21st century.
The Moravian church adheres to its original principle of the Bible as the only rule of faith and practice. It subscribes to both the Apostles’ and Nicene creeds but does not have a distinctive creed of its own, believing that the various Protestant confessions have already established the chief articles of the Christian faith. The litany used at the Easter sunrise service summarizes the church’s main beliefs. Worship is liturgical and follows the traditional church year. The Lord’s Supper is celebrated about six times a year and in some areas monthly. German chorales figure prominently in the hymns used. Strongly Christocentric, the Moravian church emphasizes the sufferings of Christ during Holy Week, preceding Easter.
