Orthodox Judaism,   the religion of those Jews who adhere most strictly to traditional beliefs and practices. Jewish Orthodoxy resolutely refuses to accept the position of Reform Judaism that the Bible and other sacred Jewish writings contain not only eternally valid moral principles but also historically and culturally conditioned adaptations and interpretations of the Law that may be legitimately discarded in modern times. In Orthodox Judaism, therefore, both the Written Law (Torah, the first five books of the Old Testament) and the Oral Law (codified in the Mishna and interpreted in the Talmud) are immutably fixed and remain the sole norm of religious observance.
Orthodox Judaism has resisted modern pressures to modify its observance and has held fast to such practices as daily worship, dietary laws (kashruth), traditional prayers and ceremonies, regular and intensive study of the Torah, and separation of men and women in the synagogue. It also enjoins strict observance of the sabbath and religious festivals and does not permit instrumental music during communal services.
Despite such seeming inflexibility, Orthodox Judaism is marked by considerable variety. Neo-Orthodoxy, for example, a late 19th-century development under the leadership of Samson Raphael Hirsch, sanctioned modern dress, the use of the vernacular in sermons, and a more positive view of modern culture.
All Jewish groups—Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform—consider themselves and each other as adherents of the Jewish faith. This fact, however, has not deterred Orthodox rabbis from challenging the legitimacy of certain non-Orthodox marriages, divorces, and conversions on the grounds that they violate prescriptions of Jewish law.
In the United States many Orthodox synagogues have joined together to form the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America. Most Orthodox rabbis are affiliated with the Rabbinical Council of America, the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada, or the Rabbinical Alliance of America. Yeshiva University, in New York City, composed of a rabbinical seminary and departments for secular studies, is one of the leading centres of Orthodox Judaism in the United States. In the State of Israel, Orthodoxy is the official form of Judaism and has considerable power and status exercised through the Chief Rabbinate of Israel. 
