Orthodox,  (from Greek orthodoxos, “of the right opinion”), true doctrine and its adherents as opposed to heterodox or heretical doctrines and their adherents. The word was first used in early 4th-century Christianity by the Greek Fathers. Because almost every Christian group believes that it holds the true faith (though not necessarily exclusively), the meaning of “orthodox” in a particular instance can be correctly determined only after examination of the context in which it appears.
It forms part of the official title of the Greek-speaking church (Eastern Orthodox Church) and those in communion with it (Russian Orthodox Church). Also including orthodox as part of their titles are some of the smaller Eastern churches, which separated from the rest of Christendom in the 5th century as a result of the Monophysite controversy concerning the question of two natures in Christ.
Within Judaism, Orthodox Judaism represents a form of religious belief and practice that adheres most strictly to ancient tradition. Orthodox Judaism, consequently, rejects the view held by modern Reform Judaism that the Bible and other sacred Jewish writings contain not only eternally valid moral principles but also historically and culturally conditioned interpretations of the Law that may be legitimately abandoned. For Orthodox Jews, therefore, the Law is immutably fixed and remains the sole norm of religious observance. Strictly speaking, the term Orthodox does not refer to doctrinal affirmations but to the observance of Torah, the Law.
The term is also used to distinguish true Islamic doctrine from heretical teachings, such as those of the Muʿtazilites.
Orthodox is also applied to a certain type of Protestantism that was dominant in Europe in the 17th century; it has also been used to refer to theologically and biblically conservative Christians. The term evangelical orthodoxy is commonly applied to Protestant Christianity that insists on the full or literal authority and inerrancy of the Bible. In a nonreligious sense, the accepted views held by any unified body of opinion or in any field of study are referred to as orthodox.
