Orthodox Church in America, formerly Russian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church of America,  ecclesiastically independent, or autocephalous, church of the Eastern Orthodox communion, recognized as such by its mother church in Russia; it adopted its present name on April 10, 1970.
Established in 1794 in Alaska, then Russian territory, the Russian Orthodox mission spread to other parts of the North American continent after the sale of Alaska to the United States (1867). In 1872 the episcopal see was transferred from Sitka, Alaska, to San Francisco and in 1905 to New York. It incorporated many Greek Catholics (Roman Catholics of Eastern rite), immigrants from Austro-Hungary (Galicia and Carpatho-Russia) who returned to Orthodoxy upon arrival in America. It also organized parishes for Russian, Ukrainian, Greek, Serbian, Albanian, Romanian, Bulgarian, and Syrian immigrants.
In 1905 Archbishop Tikhon, head of the American diocese and future patriarch of Moscow (1918), submitted a plan for the autonomy and eventual autocephaly of the American Church to the Holy Synod of St. Petersburg. He also encouraged services in English and published appropriate liturgical books.
In the chaos that followed the Russian Revolution, the administration of the church was paralyzed and relations with Russia cut. Non-Russian ethnic groups organized separate jurisdictions connected with their own mother churches. Thus, in 1922, a Greek archdiocese was established in America by the patriarch of Constantinople. The Orthodox Church in America was consequently divided into a number of national dioceses, each designated by its ethnic origin.
The original diocese itself severed relations with Moscow and in 1924 proclaimed its self-government and broke completely with the Russian Church rather than give a statement of loyalty to the Soviet government. Thus, the American metropolitanate became de facto independent, but without regular canonical status.
The creation of an autocephalous Orthodox Church in America in 1970 provided it with permanent status, without any dependence upon foreign interests, and allowed Orthodox Americans to define their religious affiliation without reference to ethnic origin.
The Orthodox Church in America was joined by Romanian, Bulgarian, Mexican, and Albanian ethnic groups. It maintains a graduate school of theology, St. Vladimir’s Seminary, in New York City; an undergraduate school at St. Tikhon Monastery, in South Canaan, Pa.; and a seminary for the training of Native Alaskan clergy in Kodiak, Alaska. A member of the World Council of Churches and the National Council of Churches in the U.S.A., the Orthodox Church is governed by a council of bishops, clergy, and laity. It includes approximately 400 parishes, using mostly English in worship.
The Orthodox Church in America does not include all Orthodox groups in the United States and Canada. Among others are the Greek archdiocese, subject to the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Total Orthodox Church membership in America has been estimated at nearly 6,000,000.
