Palatine Chapel, German Pfalzkapelle, also called Palace Chapel,  private chapel associated with a residence, especially of an emperor. Many of the early Christian emperors built private churches in their palaces—often more than one—as described in literary sources of the Byzantine period. Such structures in Constantinople (now Istanbul, Tur.) inspired the impressive 12th-century Palatine Chapel (Cappella Palatina) of the Sicilian king Roger II at Palermo, Sicily, which combines features of Norman and Islamic architecture.
The imperial chapel of Charlemagne, now forming the central component of the cathedral in Aachen, Germany, is the best-known surviving example of a palatine chapel. Considered a masterpiece of Carolingian architecture because of its intricately designed core, Aachen Cathedral also exhibits notable elements of the Gothic style. The cathedral was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1978.
Constructed on the site of an earlier, smaller house of worship dating from the 780s and 790s, the Palatine Chapel was consecrated in 805 to serve as the imperial church. It was designed by Odo of Metz, who modeled it after the Byzantine-style church of San Vitale (consecrated 547) in Ravenna, Italy. The most important surviving examples of Carolingian architecture are exhibited in the chapel. Its octagonal, domed central area (the Octagon) is surrounded by a tall (two-story), 16-sided ambulatory. Adjacent to the Octagon is the West Hall, with its formerly open-air atrium. Also notable are the imperial box on the upper floor and the winding staircases that lead up to the twin towers. The cupola crowning the chapel’s dome rises to a height of 101.5 feet (30.9 metres). For centuries the chapel had the highest vaulted interior in northern Europe.
In 814 the Palatine Chapel became Charlemagne’s final resting place, and the Charlemagne Shrine (incorporating his remains) now stands in the choir. A marble-slab throne, which was used for the coronations of 32 Holy Roman emperors in the period from 936 to 1531, is thought to be Carolingian. From the mid-14th century to 1414, the choir of the chapel was reconstructed in the Gothic style, with walls incorporating thousands of panes of glass. Also during the 15th century, several subsidiary chapels and a vestibule were added to the main structure, and the enlarged building was designated Aachen Cathedral.
A large-scale restoration program for the structure, including the nearly 600-year-old “glass house” choir, began in 1995 in anticipation of the 1,200th anniversary of the consecration of Charlemagne’s chapel; exterior restoration work on the cathedral was completed in 2006.
