Palladius,   (born c. 363, Galatia, Anatolia—died  before 431, Aspuna), Galatian monk, bishop, and chronicler whose Lausiac History, an account of early Egyptian and Middle Eastern Christian monasticism, provides the most valuable single source for the origins of Christian asceticism.
Palladius took up the ascetical life himself, first at the Mount of Olives, the scene of Christ’s Passion outside Jerusalem, then in Egypt in the Nitrian desert, now Wādī an-Naṭrūn, to avail himself of the advice of the 4th-century pioneer monks Macarius and Evagrius Ponticus. Returning to Palestine c. 399 because of poor health, he was named bishop of Helenopolis, near modern Istanbul.
Soon after 400, Palladius began an extended defense of his articulate theological mentor St. John Chrysostom, patriarch of Constantinople, against charges of heresy. Enemies both at the rival theological school of Alexandria, Egypt, and at Constantinople’s imperial court, embarrassed by Chrysostom’s moral exhortations and envious of his office, accused him of doctrinal errors. For Palladius’ support of Chrysostom at Byzantium and at Rome, the Eastern Roman emperor Arcadius exiled him for six years, during which time, c. 408, he wrote his Dialogue on the Life of St. John Chrysostom. Styled after the manner of Plato’s Phaedo, it provides data with which to reconstruct the political–theological controversy.
In 413, after his banishment was lifted, Palladius became bishop of Aspuna in Galatia, and during 419–420 he composed his chronicles on “The Lives of the Friends of God,” referring to the earliest Christian ascetics in the various wilderness areas of Egypt and Asia Minor. This Lausiac History, dedicated to Lausus, chamberlain of Emperor Theodosius II, is a fusion of personal experiences with secondary accounts of desert monasticism. Although sometimes credulous in repeating legendary narratives modeled after the classical Greek form of heroic epic, Palladius also exhibits a sober humanism that avoids pious ascetical theory, as in his reaction to monastic vanity: “To drink wine with reason is better than to drink water with pride.” After previous doubts, 20th-century scholarship has verified the authenticity of the Lausiac History as well as part of a treatise on ascetical ideals of India. 
