Pelagius,  (born c. 354, probably Britain—died after 418, possibly Palestine), monk and theologian whose heterodox theological system known as Pelagianism emphasized the primacy of human effort in spiritual salvation.
Coming to Rome about 380, Pelagius, though not a priest, became a highly regarded spiritual director for both clergy and laity. The rigorous asceticism of his adherents acted as a reproach to the spiritual sloth of many Roman Christians, whose moral standards greatly distressed him. He blamed Rome’s moral laxity on the doctrine of divine grace that he heard a bishop cite from the Confessions of St. Augustine, who in his prayer for spiritual continence asked God to grant whatever grace the divine will determined. Pelagius attacked this teaching on the grounds that it imperilled the entire moral law and soon gained a considerable following at Rome. Henceforth his closest collaborator was a lawyer named Celestius.
After the fall of Rome to the Visigoth chieftain Alaric in 410, Pelagius and Celestius went to Africa. There they encountered the hostile criticism of Augustine, who published several denunciatory letters concerning their doctrine, particularly Pelagius’s insistence on humankind’s basically good moral nature and on individual responsibility for voluntarily choosing Christian asceticism for spiritual advancement.
Pelagius left for Palestine about 412. There, although accused of heresy at the synod of Jerusalem in 415, he succeeded in clearing himself and avoiding censure. In response to further attacks from Augustine and the Latin biblical scholar St. Jerome, Pelagius wrote De libero arbitrio (“On Free Will”) in 416, which resulted in the condemnation of his teaching by two African councils. In 417 Pope Innocent I endorsed the condemnations and excommunicated Pelagius and Celestius. Innocent’s successor, St. Zosimus, at first pronounced him innocent on the basis of Pelagius’s Libellus fidei (“Brief Statement of Faith”), but, after renewed investigation at the council of Carthage in 418, Zosimus confirmed the council’s nine canons condemning Pelagius. Nothing more is known of Pelagius after this date.
