Peter Akinola, in full Peter Jasper Akinola,  (born January 27, 1944, Abeokuta, Nigeria), Nigerian Anglican archbishop who served as primate of the Church of Nigeria (2000–10). In 2007 he created a controversial American diocese to welcome discontented Episcopal parishes to a more conservative branch of the Anglican church.
Akinola was four years old when his father died, and he was sent to live with an uncle. He attended school between ages 10 and 16, when he left school to learn a trade. After an apprenticeship in Lagos, Akinola became a successful furniture maker and patent-medicine seller, but he gave up these occupations to study for the priesthood. He was ordained a deacon in 1978 and a priest in 1979. In 1981 he graduated with a master’s degree from the Virginia Theological Seminary in Alexandria, Virginia. Upon his return to Nigeria, he served in the Abuja diocese, being consecrated as bishop in 1989. In 1998 he became archbishop in Islam-dominated northern Nigeria, and in 2000 he was elected primate of all Nigeria.
Akinola drew international attention after V. Gene Robinson of New Hampshire in 2003 became the first openly gay Anglican bishop. Akinola said that the U.S. Episcopal Church had “chosen the path of deviation from the historic faith” and (erroneously) called homosexuality “an aberration unknown even in animal relationships.” Under Akinola’s leadership the Nigerian church established the Convocation of Anglicans in North America (CANA) to provide a way for congregations that were alienated by the actions of the Episcopal Church to retain fellowship with the Anglican Communion. CANA’s first missionary bishop, Martyn Minns of Virginia, was installed in May 2007 against the wishes of the archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams.
Akinola also made news in 2006 when, as president of the Christian Association of Nigeria, he issued a statement in response to Muslim riots ignited by the printing in Danish newspapers of cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad. “May we at this stage remind our Muslim brothers that they do not have the monopoly of violence in this nation,” the archbishop said. Archbishop Williams argued that Akinola meant to issue a warning, not a threat. In 2004, however, Akinola had refused to condemn the retaliatory killings of 700 Muslims following the deaths of 75 Christians in sectarian violence.
Despite his controversial actions, by 2007 Akinola led the nearly 20 million members in the world’s fastest-growing Anglican province, second in membership only to the Church of England. His church was a prominent example of the growth of Christianity in the “Global South” made up of Africa, Latin America, and parts of Asia. Akinola retired as primate in 2010 and was succeeded by Nicholas Okoh.
