Petro Mohyla, Romanian Petru Movilă, also called Peter Mogila,  (born Dec. 21, 1596, Moldavia [now in Romania]—died  Dec. 22, 1646, Kiev, Pol. [now in Ukraine]), Orthodox monk and theologian of Moldavian origin who served as metropolitan of Kiev and who authored the Orthodox Confession of the Catholic and Apostolic Eastern Church. He reformed Slavic theological scholarship and generally set doctrinal standards for Eastern Orthodoxy that endured until the 19th century.
Of royal Moldavian lineage, Mohyla migrated to the Polish Ukraine; he was educated in Jesuit schools in Poland and became proficient in Classical languages and Latin Scholastic theology. He entered the famous Monastery of the Caves at Kiev in 1625 and was made its superior in 1627. In 1633 he was elected metropolitan of Kiev. As metropolitan, Mohyla made great efforts to improve the education of his clergy and laity at a time when both Roman Catholic and Protestant missionaries were very active among the Orthodox population of Poland and Ukraine. In 1633 he transformed the theological college of the Kiev monastery into a school of humanities and theology and enlisted a Western-trained faculty for it. The academy became the source of a theological revival in the entire Russian Orthodox Church, and its influence was felt in Russia until the end of the 19th century. Mohyla also obtained the Polish monarch’s acknowledgment of the rights of the Orthodox church in Polish territory, and he restored to Orthodox control the churches and properties that had been expropriated by Roman Catholics.
To bring order to Orthodox theology in its two-fronted controversy with the Roman church and with Protestant reformers, Mohyla in 1640 composed The Orthodox Confession of Faith of the Eastern Orthodox Church. It was approved by the four Eastern patriarchs and was formally approved at the Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. It remains one of the primary outlines of Eastern Orthodox doctrines as set forth in refutation of Roman Catholic and Protestant claims.
