Prajnaparamita, (Sanskrit: “Perfection of Wisdom”)  body of sutras and their commentaries that represents the oldest of the major forms of Mahayana Buddhism, one that radically extended the basic concept of ontological voidness (shunyata). The name denotes the female personification of the literature or of wisdom, sometimes called the Mother of All Buddhas. In the Prajnaparamita texts, prajna (wisdom), an aspect of the original Eightfold Path, has become the supreme paramita (perfection) and the primary avenue to nirvana. The content of this wisdom is the realization of the illusory nature of all phenomena—not only of this world, as in earlier Buddhism, but of transcendental realms as well.
The main creative period of Prajnaparamita thought extended from perhaps 100 bce to 150 ce. The best-known work from this period is the Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita (Eight Thousand-Verse Prajnaparamita). The first Chinese translation appeared in 179 ce. Later some 18 “portable editions” were forthcoming, the best-known of which is the Diamond Sutra. Still later, schematic and scholastic commentaries were produced in the Madhyamika (“Middle Way”) monasteries of eastern India, thus introducing into the Prajnaparamita movement the same confining rationalism against which it had reacted in the first place. The radically anti-ontological stance had been intended to free the spirit in its quest for experiential enlightenment.
The way of negation, however, is not the sole content of these texts. They incorporate, as aids to meditation, the numerical lists (matrika) also found in Abhidharma (scholastic) literature. They also supplement their philosophical austerity with the personally appealing figures of mythology.
The Chinese traveler Faxian described images of the personified Prajnaparamita in India as early as 400 ce, but all known existent images date from 800 or later. She is usually represented yellow or white in colour, with one head and two arms (sometimes more), the hands in the teaching gesture (dharmachakra-mudra) or holding a lotus and the sacred book. Also frequently associated with her are a rosary, sword (to cleave away ignorance), thunderbolt (vajra, symbolizing the emptiness of the void), or begging bowl (renunciation of material goods being a prerequisite to the obtaining of wisdom). Images of the deity are found throughout Southeast Asia and in Nepal and Tibet. In Vajrayana (Tantric) Buddhism, she is described as the female consort of the Adi-Buddha (first Buddha).
