Prarthana Samaj,   (Sanskrit: “Prayer Society”), Hindu reform society established in Bombay in the 1860s. In purpose it is similar to, but not affiliated with, the more widespread Brahmo Samaj and had its greatest sphere of influence in and around India’s Mahārāshtra state. The aim of the society is the promulgation of theistic worship and social reform, and its early goals were opposition to the caste system, the introduction of widow remarriage, the encouragement of female education, and the abolition of child marriage.
The immediate predecessor of the Prarthana Samaj in Bombay was the Paramahamsa Sabha, a secret society formed in 1849 for discussion, the singing of hymns, and the sharing of a communal meal prepared by a low-caste cook. In 1864 Keshab Chunder Sen, founder of the Bharatvarshiya Brahmo Samaj, visited Bombay, and the interest he evoked there bore fruit several months later when the new association was formed. The Prarthana Samaj differed from its Calcutta counterpart by its greater reluctance to break with orthodox Hindu tradition, and the Prarthana never required members to give up caste, idol worship, or the traditional religious sacraments. Early leaders of the movement were M.G. Ranade (1842–1901), who was a prominent social reformer and a judge of the Bombay High Court, and R.G. Bhandarkar (1837–1925), a noted scholar of Sanskrit.
Activities of the Prarthana Samaj include study groups, the support of missionaries, a journal, night schools for working people, free libraries, women’s and student associations, and an orphanage. Its members were instrumental in the organization of other important social-reform movements that arose at the turn of the century, including the Depressed Classes Mission Society of India and the National Social Conference. Like that of the Brahmo Samaj and the Arya Samaj, the success of the Prarthana Samaj in restoring Hindu self-respect was an important factor in the growth of Indian nationalism, which led ultimately to political independence.
