Presbyterian Church of England,   church organized in 1876 by merger of the United Presbyterian Church and various English and Scottish Presbyterian congregations in England. The United Presbyterian Church had resulted from the merger of some Scottish and English Presbyterian congregations in England in 1847.
In England, Presbyterianism, like Congregationalism, had its roots in the Puritan movement within the Church of England. The Presbyterian Puritans who wanted the episcopally governed Church of England to adopt the presbyterian system of church government made little headway in reaching their goal during the reigns of Queen Elizabeth I and James I in the 16th and 17th centuries. During the English Civil War (1642–51), however, which began during the reign of Charles I (1625–49), the Presbyterian Puritans reached the height of their power.
Beginning in 1640, events moved steadily toward control of England by the Presbyterian–Parliamentary party. Charles was driven to accept a bill removing bishops from all temporal offices and depriving them of their powers of arrest and imprisonment. Eventually, Parliament began preparing to establish the presbyterian system of church government in the Church of England.
The Westminster Assembly, which met from 1643 to 1649, was summoned to advise Parliament in religious matters. At Parliament’s request the assembly prepared the Westminster Confession, the Westminster catechisms, a Form of Government, and a Directory of Public Worship. These documents were the results of years of debate by many able scholars. They were accepted by the Parliament in 1648, but the English Church never had an opportunity to consider them.
As the Civil War progressed, Oliver Cromwell, an Independent (Congregationalist), and his army, not Parliament, became supreme in England. The political–religious program of the army alienated the Presbyterian Puritans, some of whom began communicating with the King. In 1648 the army purged Parliament of all Presbyterians (140) and left about 60 Independents in the Commons. This Rump Parliament tried and executed Charles I, set up a military dictatorship under Cromwell, terminated the Presbyterian establishment, and granted freedom to all religious groups while giving special privileges to Congregationalism.
Although the Presbyterian Puritans protested, they had little influence and had lost their popular following. Despite the large place accorded to the laity in the general structure of the Presbyterian system, circumstances had led to the formation of only a ministerial party in England and not to the formation of a Presbyterian Church. Fear of the Independents and reliance upon Parliament and upon strong political figures had been disastrous. Few of the several thousand congregations held by the Presbyterians ever had elders or any lay leadership. Also, the controversy with the episcopal party had come to involve almost exclusively issues of interest only to the clergy.
After Cromwell’s death (1658), Parliament was recalled, and Presbyterianism was briefly reestablished. When the monarchy was restored under Charles II (reigned 1660–85), the King reestablished the episcopal form of church government. Most Presbyterian ministers capitulated and accepted episcopal ordination, while about 2,000 ministers resisted and were deposed from their churches. Presbyterianism never regained power in England, although the Westminster Confession and Catechisms became the doctrinal standards of English-speaking Presbyterians.
After William and Mary became the English monarchs (1689), all Protestants in England were granted toleration. Presbyterian congregations existed but had little organization. Many ministers eventually became Congregationalists, Unitarians, or Anglicans, and by the end of the 18th century English Presbyterianism continued only in a few congregations.
Presbyterianism in England was revived by Scots who began settling in England in the 18th century and organized their own congregations. Unions eventually led to the organization of the Presbyterian Church of England (1876), which in 1972 was merged into the United Reformed Church in England and Wales.
