Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), byname PC(USA),  U.S. Protestant denomination formed on June 10, 1983, in the merger of the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. (headquartered in New York City) and the Presbyterian Church in the United States (headquartered in Atlanta). The merger ended a North-South split among Presbyterians that dated from the American Civil War.
The U.S. Presbyterian Church traces its beginnings to the earliest Presbyterian churches in the American colonies. These were established in the 17th century by those New England Puritans who preferred the presbyterian system of church polity (government) to that of New England Congregationalism. Also in the 17th century, Scotch-Irish, English, and other settlers formed Presbyterian churches in Maryland, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. In 1706 some of these churches joined in a loosely organized presbytery (assembly of the ordained members of several churches), which in 1716 was expanded to a synod of several presbyteries.
The church was a blend of New England Puritan Presbyterians, Scotch-Irish Presbyterians, plus Welsh and some other Presbyterians. The Scotch-Irish regarded doctrine as the basis of the church and strove for unqualified acceptance of the Westminster Confession (1648), now the standard declaration of Calvinist theology in the United Kingdom. The New England Puritans regarded the Christian life as the basis of the church, accepted creeds as expressions of the faith held by the church, and wished the superior church courts to have only limited and fixed powers. The church suffered a schism from 1741 to 1758 because of the religious revivals of the 18th century. The New England (pro-revival) group, called the New Side, trebled during the schism, while the Scotch-Irish (antirevival), called the Old Side, declined. The two groups reunited in 1758, and the church experienced growth because many of the several hundred thousand Scotch-Irish immigrants who went to the American colonies after 1760 became members.
Presbyterians were active participants in the American Revolution, and after the war the church expanded westward. The need for a more definite organization led to the first General Assembly, held in Philadelphia in 1789.
Dissension within the church over a Plan of Union (drawn up in 1801) with the Congregationalists, the slavery question, and theological disputes led to a schism in 1837. Both groups continued to call themselves the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., but one group, located primarily in the North, added “New School” and the other added “Old School.” Both groups continued to grow, but, during the Civil War, the Old School Presbyterians in the South seceded and formed the Presbyterian Church in the Confederate States of America. After the war the North-South groups of the two churches could not agree to reunite. Unions took place instead of New School and Old School to form in the South the Presbyterian Church in the United States and in the North the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.
In the late 19th century and the first part of the 20th century, the churches in both the North and the South continued to grow despite controversies concerning biblical criticism and the activities of a group of conservatives known as fundamentalists. The Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. was joined by two smaller churches: the major part of the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in 1906 and the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Church in 1920.
Another historically separate group developed out of the Presbyterian organizations formed by various Scottish and Scotch-Irish immigrants who settled in America in the 18th century. These organizations reflected the divisions within the Scottish church, but, as these issues became less important in America, mergers took place. In 1782 some of the Associate, or Seceder, Presbyterians (Scottish Presbyterians who had seceded earlier in the 18th century from the established Church of Scotland) united with the Reformed Presbyterians, and these together with other Secession groups united to form in 1858 the United Presbyterian Church of North America. This church tended to be quite conservative in doctrine and worship practices, but, gradually, changes were made. It was active in the abolition cause and in other reform movements.
In 1958 the United Presbyterian Church of North America merged with the U.S.A. Presbyterians, forming the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. This church became active in ecumenical affairs. It adopted a new confession, the Confession of 1967, which with several historic Presbyterian confessions is contained in the church’s Book of Confessions.
The Southern church, the Presbyterian Church in the United States, traditionally promoted local initiative and restricted the powers of all central agencies. Thus, attempts to unite the Presbyterian Church in the United States with the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. failed in the 1950s when the Southern church refused centralization. A new movement for union began in the late 1970s, however, and succeeded in 1983.
Like many other denominations, in the 1990s the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) grappled with the issue of homosexuality and specifically with the question of whether homosexuals should be barred from ordination. In 1997 the denomination amended its constitution to bar from the offices of clergy, elder, and deacon any member who was sexually active outside marriage (the amendment was understood to apply primarily to homosexuals). In 2011, however, the 1997 amendment was nullified by a majority vote of the presbyteries, thus enabling each presbytery to decide the question of ordination for itself. Later that year Scott Anderson became the denomination’s first openly gay minister to be ordained since the 1997 amendment was overturned. The denomination also debated whether to allow its clergy to perform same-sex marriages. In 2012 the denomination rejected a proposal to change the definition of marriage in its constitution from a union “between a man and a woman” to a union “between two people.” In 2014, however, the General Assembly, the church’s highest governing body, voted to allow clergy to perform same-sex marriages where legal under state law. It also approved the change in its constitutional definition of marriage that it had rejected two years earlier. The change was upheld by a majority of presbyteries in the following year.
