Priscillian,  (born c. 340, Spain—died  385, Trier, Belgica, Gaul [now in Germany]), early Christian bishop who was the first heretic to receive capital punishment. A rigorous ascetic, he founded Priscillianism, an unorthodox doctrine that persisted into the 6th century.
Around the Spanish towns of Mérida and Córdoba, Priscillian began about the year 375 to teach a doctrine that was similar to both Gnosticism and Manichaeism in its dualistic belief that matter was evil and the spirit good. Among his many unorthodox doctrines, Priscillian taught that angels and human souls emanated from the Godhead, that bodies were created by the devil, and that human souls were joined to bodies as a punishment for sins. These beliefs led to a denial of the true humanity of Christ.
Priscillian led his followers in a quasi-secret society that aimed for higher perfection through ascetic practices and outlawed all sensual pleasure, marriage, and the consumption of wine and meat. The spread of Priscillianism throughout western and southern Spain and in southern Gaul disturbed the Spanish church, which, led by bishops Hyginus of Mérida and Ithacius of Ossonoba, soon opposed the new movement.
In 380 the Council of Saragossa in Spain condemned ideas attributed to Priscillian, who, nonetheless, was elected bishop of Ávila. The Roman emperor Gratian was persuaded by Priscillian’s enemies to exile him and his key disciples to Italy. Although they were not received by Pope St. Damasus I, they managed to be absolved by civil authorities, who ultimately enabled them to force Ithacius out of Spain. Ithacius went to the imperial court at Trier, where he persuaded the Roman emperor Magnus Maximus to have Priscillian tried. Priscillian was condemned in 384 by a synod at Bordeaux. Priscillian appealed to Maximus, who ordered him to Trier, where he was judged guilty of sorcery and immorality and was executed.
The fall of Maximus in 388 led to a reaction in favour of Priscillianism. In 400 and 447 councils at Toledo in Spain condemned some of Priscillian’s doctrines, which in 407–08 were outlawed by the Roman emperor Flavius Honorius. In 563 the Council of Braga renewed the condemnation, and thereafter Priscillianism as an organized cult disappeared.
The question of Priscillian’s orthodoxy has been much discussed. In 1889, 11 treatises ascribed to Priscillian were published, revealing his unorthodox doctrine of the Trinity in which the Son differs from the Father.
