Protestant Orthodoxy, also called Protestant Scholasticism,  phase of orthodoxy that characterized both Lutheran and Reformed theology after the 16th-century Reformation. Protestant Orthodoxy understood Christianity as a system of doctrines, and thus its emphasis was on “right doctrine.”
In Lutheranism the period of orthodoxy began about 1560 with the theological effort to reunite the factions that had developed after Martin Luther’s death. The “golden age” of orthodoxy ended about 1700, but it remained a potent force until much later.
The central aspects of orthodox Lutheran theology included the primacy of the inerrant Bible; the forgiveness of sins exclusively by divine grace for Christ’s sake through faith as the core of the biblical message; and the vital roles of baptism, absolution, and the Eucharist. Other key aspects were reverence for the historic creeds, especially the doctrine of Christ, and a strong defense of the Lutheran position in comparison with Roman Catholicism, Reformed Protestantism, and Socinianism, a form of Unitarianism.
The era of Reformed orthodoxy began shortly after the death of John Calvin (1564) and ended about 1700. Reformed theologians originally called themselves orthodox in contrast to Roman Catholics and to Lutherans, whom they regarded as only imperfectly reformed. The term soon came to designate a special type of Calvinism, which, in its severe form, stood in conscious opposition to Arminianism and Socinianism, as well as to Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism.
The architects of Reformed orthodoxy were Theodore Beza, Calvin’s successor at Geneva, and Hieronymus Zanchius (also known as Girolamo Zanchi), professor at Neustadt an der Haardt, Ger. Beza worked to preserve the theology contained in Calvin’s Institutes of the Christian Religion. According to Beza the capstone of this system was the doctrine of an absolute decree by which God predestined some persons to everlasting life and others to hell. Unlike Calvin, Beza was moved by philosophical as well as biblical considerations. Zanchius gave Reformed orthodoxy its classic formulation of the doctrine of the perseverance of the elect.
Additional features generally characteristic of Reformed orthodoxy were a doctrine of the sacraments that stressed their symbolic nature; an ethical approach to repentance; a presbyterian form of church government; stress on church discipline and practical Christianity; and, in comparison with Lutheranism, a more literal approach to the Bible and a greater separation of the divine and human natures in Christ.
The strongholds of Reformed orthodoxy were in Switzerland and the Netherlands. Presbyterianism in Great Britain and early American Puritanism were generally orthodox. The French Reformed community formally accepted the canons of Dort (1619), a Reformed orthodox confession, but amid the political confusion of the period a vocal humanistic opposition developed. German Reformed theology, like Anglicanism, was never orthodox in the strict sense. The German Heidelberg Catechism taught a rather mild Calvinism.
Protestant Orthodoxy, in both its Lutheran and Reformed types, was deemed too intellectual  by the Pietists, whose movement stressed personal faith and biblical tradition over doctrine. It was also challenged by the Enlightenment in the 18th century.
