Rashi, acronym of Rabbi Shlomo Yitzḥaqi,  (born 1040, Troyes, Champagne—died July 13, 1105, Troyes), renowned medieval French commentator on the Bible and the Talmud (the authoritative Jewish compendium of law, lore, and commentary). Rashi combined the two basic methods of interpretation, literal and nonliteral, in his influential Bible commentary. His commentary on the Talmud was a landmark in Talmudic exegesis, and his work still serves among Jews as the most substantive introduction to biblical and postbiblical Judaism. Rashi also composed some penitential hymns (seliḥot), which revolve around twin themes: the harsh reality of exile and the comforting belief in redemption.
Shlomo (Solomon) Yitzḥaqi (son of Isaac) studied in the schools of Worms and Mainz, the old Rhenish centres of Jewish learning, where he absorbed the methods, teachings, and traditions associated with Rabbi Gershom ben Judah (c. 960–1028/1040), called the “Light of the Exile” because of his preeminence as the first great scholar of northern European Judaism. Rashi then transferred his scholarly legacy to the valley of the Seine (c. 1065), where he was the de facto but unofficial head of the small Jewish community (about 100–200 people) in Troyes.
Rashi’s Bible commentary illustrates vividly the coexistence and, to some extent, the successful reconciliation of the two basic methods of interpretation: the literal and the nonliteral. Rashi seeks the literal meaning, deftly using rules of grammar and syntax and carefully analyzing both text and context, but does not hesitate to mount Midrashic explanations, utilizing allegory, parable, and symbolism, upon the underlying literal interpretation. As a result, some of his successors are critical of his searching literalism and deviation from traditional Midrashic exegesis, while others find his excessive fondness for nonliteral homilies uncongenial. Yet it is precisely the versatility and mixture, the blend of creative eclecticism and originality, that account for the genius, the animation, and the unrivaled popularity of his commentary, which, symbolically, was the first book printed in Hebrew (1475). The commentary had a significant influence on Christian Bible study from the 12th-century Victorines to the Franciscan scholar Nicholas of Lyra (c. 1270–1349), who, in turn, was a major source of Martin Luther’s Bible work. Its influence continues in contemporary exegesis and revised translations. Rashi’s customary use of a vernacular gloss to clarify the exact meaning of an obscure or technical term—there are more than 3,000 of them in his works—also makes his commentary an important source for the study of Old French.
Rashi’s commentary on the Talmud, based on the collective achievements of the previous generations of Franco-German scholars, reflects its genesis in the oral classroom instruction that Rashi gave in Troyes for several decades. The commentary, sometimes referred to as kuntros (literally, “notebook”), resembles a living tutor; it explains the text in its entirety, guides the student in methodological and substantive matters, resolves linguistic difficulties, and indicates the normative conclusions of the discussion. Unlike Maimonides’ commentary on the Mishna (the authoritative compendium of Jewish Oral Law), which may be read independently of the underlying text, Rashi’s commentary is interwoven with the underlying text. Indeed, text and commentary form a unified mosaic.
Rashi’s work was literally epochal, and the agreement of subsequent scholars that the basic needs of text commentary had been fulfilled stimulated the rise of a new school of writers known as tosafists, who composed tosafot (glosses), refining, criticizing, expanding, or qualifying Rashi’s interpretations and conclusions. Skillfully and honestly combining stricture and supplement, they were able to perpetuate and augment the achievement of the great Rashi.
