Saint Germanus I,  (born c. 634, Constantinople [Istanbul, Turkey]—died c. 732, Platonium, near Athens [Greece]; feast day May 12), Byzantine patriarch of Constantinople and theologian who led the orthodox opposition during the Iconoclastic Controversy (q.v.). His writings also fostered the doctrine and devotion to the Virgin Mary.
When Germanus rebelled against the execution of his patrician father by the emperor Constantine IV in 668, he was made a eunuch and pressed into the ranks of the clergy at the cathedral of Hagia Sophia. Later recognized as a theological consultant, Germanus influenced the emperor in convoking the third Council of Constantinople (680–681), which condemned the errors of the Monothelites, Christians who held that Christ had only one will. Made bishop of Cyzicus, about 705, he was pressured by the emperor Philippicus Bardanes to sign a decree in 712 rehabilitating Monothelite teaching. Elevated to the patriarchate of Constantinople in August 715, under the orthodox emperor Anastasius II, Germanus pronounced the orthodox creed and once again repudiated Monothelitism at a local council that same year. He later composed a tract delineating the orthodox teaching of the two natures (human and divine) in Christ and directed it to the Armenian church in order to convert it from the errors of the Monophysites, who held that Christ had only one nature. Unsuccessful in this endeavour, he then instituted a liturgical service of thanksgiving to the Virgin Mary for the deliverance of Constantinople from the Persian siege of 626 and the Arab Muslim attack of 718. Heading the resistance to the Iconoclastic movement initiated in 727 by the emperor Leo III the Isaurian, Germanus resigned his office in 730 and retired to his estates in Greece rather than subscribe to Leo’s unorthodox decree. He probably wrote his historical treatise De haeresibus et synodis (“On Heresies and Synods”) while in retirement. Condemned by the Iconoclasts in 754, he was vindicated at the seventh Council of Constantinople in 787.
Because his writings were ordered burned by Leo III, only a few of Germanus’ works survive. In addition to Ad Armenos (“Letter to the Armenians”), he is credited with three tracts controverting Iconoclasm and seven conferences on the doctrinal history of the cult of the Virgin Mary. A strong advocate of Marian devotion, Germanus in his works is a source for the theological development of her role as mediator of supernatural blessings.
