Saint John Fisher, byname John of Rochester,  (born 1469, Beverley, Yorkshire, Eng.—died June 22, 1535, London; canonized May 19, 1935; feast day July 9), English humanist, martyr, and prelate, who, devoted to the pope and to the Roman Catholic church, resisted King Henry VIII of England by refusing to recognize royal supremacy and the abolition of papal jurisdiction over the English church.
Ordained priest in 1491, he won the patronage of Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother of King Henry VII of England. He became her confessor in 1497 and persuaded her to found Christ’s College (1505) and St. John’s College at Cambridge. After her death in 1509, he took over at St. John’s, effecting its final establishment in 1511. In 1504 he was appointed chancellor of Cambridge and bishop of Rochester, Kent.
With the advent of Lutheranism in the 1520s, Fisher began his work as a controversialist. His books in Latin against Lutheranism and allied doctrines considered heretical by the Roman Catholic church gave him a European reputation as a theologian. In the House of Lords, he strongly opposed any state interference in church affairs, urging that the church should reform itself. When the validity of the marriage between Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon was first openly questioned in 1527, Henry and Cardinal Wolsey consulted Fisher; he incurred the king’s wrath when he defended Catherine in 1529, later publishing his defense and preaching in London on the queen’s behalf. In 1531 he vehemently opposed the granting to Henry of the title “Supreme Head of the Church and Clergy of England” and subsequently repudiated the Supremacy Act of 1534.
In March 1534 the Act of Succession declared Henry’s marriage to Catherine void and that with Anne Boleyn valid. On the following April 13 Fisher and Sir Thomas More jointly refused to take the oath required by the Act on the grounds that, while willing to accept the succession as a proper matter for Parliament, they could not accept the rest of the Act, especially because it repudiated papal authority. They were imprisoned in the Tower of London; Fisher was already seriously ill.
The passing of the Supremacy and Treason acts at the end of the year made denial of the royal titles treasonable. On May 20, 1535, Pope Paul III created Fisher a cardinal, which enraged Henry VIII and destroyed all hope for Fisher. He was called several times before councillors but refused to speak about the supremacy. In a conversation that was disguised as privileged, the solicitor general, Sir Richard Rich, reportedly tricked Fisher into confiding that the king was not and could not be supreme head of the Church of England. He was tried on June 17, condemned for treason, and executed on Tower Hill.
