St. Ignatius of Antioch, also called Ignatius Theophoros (Greek: “God Bearer”),  (died c. 110, Rome; Western feast day October 17; Eastern feast day December 20), bishop of Antioch, Syria (now in Turkey), known mainly from seven highly regarded letters that he wrote during a trip to Rome, as a prisoner condemned to be executed for his beliefs. He was apparently eager to counteract the teachings of two groups—the Judaizers, who did not accept the authority of the New Testament, and the docetists, who held that Christ’s sufferings and death were apparent but not real. The letters have often been cited as a source of knowledge of the Christian church at the beginning of the 2nd century.
Although St. Ignatius was an influential church leader and theologian, he is known almost entirely from his own writings. There is no record of his life prior to his arrest, but his letters reveal his personality and his impact on the Christianity of his time. Ignatius represented the Christian religion in transition from its Jewish origins to its assimilation in the Greco-Roman world. He laid the foundation for dogmas that would be formulated in succeeding generations. His advocacy of a hierarchical structure of the church with emphasis on episcopal authority, his insistence on the real humanity of Christ, and his ardent desire for martyrdom are subjects that have generated much discussion.
Eusebius of Caesarea, whose Ecclesiastical History is the chief primary source for the history of the church up to 324, reported that Ignatius’s arrest and his condemnation to the wild beasts in the Roman arena occurred during the reign of the Roman emperor Trajan (98–117). Eusebius, on unknown grounds, dates the event to 107 or 108. Ignatius’s letters contain the only reliable information about him, but only one of them—that to the church in Rome—is dated (August 24), and even then no year is given.
Ignatius, surnamed Theophoros, was bishop of Antioch at the time of his arrest. Whether he was a native of the city is uncertain; his Greek prose, however, does have an Eastern flavour characteristic of that part of the Hellenistic world. His thought is strongly influenced by the letters of St. Paul and also by the tradition connected with St. John the Apostle. It is possible that he knew St. John personally.
Ignatius was taken prisoner during a persecution of the Antioch church; he was put in chains and escorted, along with others, by a unit of soldiers to Troas in northwestern Asia Minor for embarkation to Rome. By that time he must have been a well-known figure among Christians. All along his way delegations of churches, even from places off his route, accompanied him from town to town. For unknown reasons, the journey was interrupted at Smyrna (modern İzmir, Turkey), where he was warmly received by the local Christians and their bishop, St. Polycarp, who was to become his beloved friend.
There he was also met by representatives—the bishop, some elders, or presbyters, and some deacons—of the nearby churches of Ephesus, Magnesia ad Maeandrum, and Tralles, who as far as possible looked after his needs. After these delegations left Smyrna, he wrote letters to their respective communities thanking them for their attention and offering them guidelines for their lives as Christians. At his request the deacon Burrus of Ephesus was allowed to stay with him. Ignatius also wrote to Rome, urging his fellow Christians there not to prevent his martyrdom by intercession on his behalf and commending to their charity Syrian Christians who had arrived there ahead of him.
From Smyrna his journey continued to the district of Troas, where a shorter stay was made pending embarkation. This stopover was not long enough for Ignatius to write to all the churches he wished to address. He did, however, write to the congregations at Philadelphia and Smyrna (these letters were delivered by Burrus, who had accompanied him to Troas) and to Bishop Polycarp, asking him in a personal letter to write to other churches in his name. At Troas he had been joined by the deacons Philo of Cilicia and Agathopus from Syria; they gave him the consoling news that Antioch was again “at peace.” It is not certain whether this meant a lull in the persecution of Christians or perhaps—to judge from Ignatius’s use of the word peace elsewhere—a return of the community to concord after some religious dissension. In his letter to Polycarp, Ignatius asked to have a deacon appointed to bring the people of Antioch the congratulations of the church of Smyrna and to encourage other churches to follow Smyrna’s example. Sometime later Polycarp wrote to the church of Philippi in Macedonia for news about Ignatius and his companions, who had recently passed through their city. His death in the Roman arena is recorded by Polycarp’s disciple St. Irenaeus, who died about 200–203. Documentation ends here; the rest is inference.
The letters of Ignatius abound in warnings against false doctrines and false teachers and in admonitions to preserve peace and concord by willing subordination in all religious matters to the clergy and, above all, to the bishop. Nevertheless, he frequently assures his readers that their own church gives no cause for concern and that his words are prompted merely by pastoral solicitude. Only in his letter to the church of Philadelphia does he intimate that at least some of the community tended to segregate, and, in a passage in the letter to the Smyrnaeans, he seems to imply that there had been dissenters.
Smyrna is the only place along his journey where Ignatius stayed for a sufficiently long time to have firsthand knowledge of the state of the church; he knew of the others from informants, who gave him little grounds for worry. Ignatius’s anxiety, perhaps, had its roots in his experiences as a bishop at Antioch. If the peace that returned to Antioch after he left is to be understood as the restoration of concord within the Christian community, then the church of Antioch might have been divided on the very same issues about which Ignatius writes to the other churches.
Ignatius apparently fought two groups of heretics: (1) Judaizers, who did not accept the authority of the New Testament and clung to such Jewish practices as observing the Sabbath, and (2) docetists (from the Greek dokein, “to seem”), who held that Christ had suffered and died only in appearance. Ignatius untiringly affirmed that the New Testament was the fulfillment of the Old Testament and insisted upon the reality of Christ’s human nature. For him, Christ’s Passion, death, and Resurrection were a vital guarantee of “life everlasting” in the risen Christ. Had Christ died only in appearance, Ignatius believed that his own suffering and his readiness to sacrifice his life for Christ would have no meaning.
Such sentiments are a strong argument against the proposition that Ignatius had come under the influence of some early form of gnosticism—a dualistic religion that stressed salvation by esoteric knowledge, or gnōsis, rather than by faith. Some of Ignatius’s formulations possibly echo gnostic language, and he seems to have made an impression on certain gnostic sects. Nevertheless, there is no trace in his letters of the basic gnostic equation of good and evil with spirit and matter. He does not even take up St. Paul’s antinomy of flesh and spirit. For him, the spirit is above the flesh rather than against it; even what the “spiritual man” does “according to the flesh” is spiritual.
