Saint Cuthbert,  (born 634/635, probably Northumbria, England—died March 20, 687, islet of Inner Farne, or House, off Northumbria; feast day March 20), bishop of the great Benedictine abbey of Lindisfarne (or Holy Island) one of the most venerated English saints, who evangelized Northumbria and was posthumously hailed as a wonder-worker.
After a divine vision, Cuthbert, a shepherd, entered (651) the Northumbrian monastery of Melrose (Mailros) under Abbot St. Eata. In 661 Melrose was struck by the plague, afflicting Cuthbert and killing the prior, whom he succeeded. Thereafter, he aided plague victims while missioning throughout the countryside, reportedly performing miracles.
When in 663/664 at the Synod of Whitby the Northumbrians decided to adopt Roman rather than Celtic church customs, Abbot-Bishop St. Colman of Lindisfarne, one of the leaders of the Celtic party, resigned his see in opposition to Whitby. In 664 Eata and Cuthbert—who, although trained in the Celtic tradition, firmly supported the synod’s decisions—were transferred to Lindisfarne, Eata as bishop and Cuthbert as prior. Thence, Cuthbert maintained reforms decreed by Whitby, instituted a severe rule, and extended his apostolate south, to Durham. A hermit by nature, Cuthbert retired in 676 to Inner Farne, where he devoted himself to prayer and where he built an oratory and cell. His fame for holiness grew. His successful efforts to protect birds (hence St. Cuthbert’s [eider] duck) made him one of the earliest wildlife conservationists.
In 684 King Ecgfrith of Northumbria made him bishop of Hexham, a see that he exchanged with Eata in 685 for that of Lindisfarne. In 687 he again retired to Inner Farne. A small 14th-century chapel stands on the site of his final hermitage. He was buried at Lindisfarne, but his body was removed in 875 to protect it from Viking raids; after many moves in northeastern England, it was finally deposited (999?) in Durham Cathedral, which, until its destruction by King Henry VIII in 1538, was a great pilgrimage site. Numerous churches and monuments are dedicated to him.
