Saint Hilarion,  (born c. ad 291, Tabatha, Palestine [near modern Gaza]—died  371, Cyprus; feast day October 21), monk and mystic who founded Christian monasticism in Palestine modeled after the Egyptian tradition.
Most knowledge about Hilarion derives from a semi-legendary and rhetorically embellished account of his life written about 391 by the Latin biblical scholar St. Jerome, using material by Bishop Epiphanius of Constantia (now Salamis, Cyprus), an influential 4th-century theologian-chronicler. Jerome greatly exaggerated Hilarion’s importance in order to glorify Palestinian monasticism, to which he himself belonged. Despite a historical nucleus, therefore, it is often difficult to determine the facts.
According to Jerome, Hilarion came from non-Christian parents and studied under a grammarian at Alexandria, where he became a Christian. He also came under the influence of the renowned desert ascetic Anthony of Egypt and followed his discipline for two months. Returning to Palestine in 306 at the age of 15, he instituted the eremitical life there by erecting a hut in the wilderness some seven miles from Maiuma, near Gaza, on the road to Egypt. He observed the strict ascetical regimen of fasting and chanting the Old Testament psalm prayers, and, like the Egyptian hermits, he wove baskets of rushes to earn his subsistence, possessing only a monk’s garb, which he willed to a colleague at death. Jerome’s account emphasizes Hilarion’s proselytizing the Saracens and his wonder-working among the sick and demoniacs. After establishing the first Palestinian monastery in 329, Hilarion, seeking solitude, migrated to the monastic centre at Thebes, Egypt, thence through North Africa and Sicily, eventually settling in Cyprus. He is credited with prophesying the religious persecution decreed by Emperor Julian the Apostate (361–363). After death, his body was recovered by the monks of his original foundation in Gaza. A cult of veneration spread to Europe, especially about Venice and Pisa, Italy, and in parts of France.
Jerome’s Vita Sancti Hilarionis (“Life of Saint Hilarion”) is contained in the series Patrologia Latina, J.-P. Migne (ed.), vol. 23 (1864). An English translation can be found in Early Christian Biographies (1952).
