St. Robert Bellarmine, Italian in full San Roberto Francesco Romolo Bellarmino,  (born October 4, 1542, Montepulciano, Tuscany [Italy]—died September 17, 1621, Rome; canonized 1930; feast day September 17), Italian cardinal and theologian, an opponent of the Protestant doctrines of the Reformation. He is considered a leading figure in the Catholic Counter-Reformation and strongly supported the self-reform decrees of the Council of Trent. During his lifetime he was regarded as one of the most enlightened of theologians and was named a doctor of the church by Pope Pius XI in 1931. He is one of the patron saints of catechists and catechumens.
Bellarmine entered the Society of Jesus in 1560. After studying in Italy at Rome, Mondovì, and Padua, he was sent to Leuven (Louvain) in the Spanish Netherlands, where he was ordained in 1570 and began to teach theology. He was forced by the strength of Protestantism and the Augustinian doctrines of grace and free will prevailing in the Low Countries to define his theological principles. He returned to Rome, where he lectured at the new Jesuit College. Made a cardinal by Pope Clement VIII in 1599, he was subsequently appointed archbishop of Capua (1602).
As a consultor of the Holy Office, he took a prominent part in the first examination of Galileo’s writings. Bellarmine, somewhat sympathetic to Galileo’s views, granted him an audience in which he warned him not to defend the Copernican theory but to regard it only as a hypothesis. Acting on the part of the Holy Office and fearing scandal at a time when Roman Catholicism and Protestantism were embroiled, Bellarmine thought it best to have the Copernican theory declared “false and erroneous.” The church so decreed in 1616.
Bellarmine’s most influential writings were the series of lectures published under the title Disputationes de controversiis Christianae fidei adversus huius temporis haereticos (1586–93; “Lectures Concerning the Controversies of the Christian Faith Against the Heretics of This Time”). They contained a lucid and uncompromising statement of Roman Catholic doctrine. He took part in the preparation of the Clementine edition (1591–92) of the Vulgate. His catechism of 1597 greatly influenced later works. In 1610 he published De Potestate Summi Pontificis in Rebus Temporalibus (“Concerning the Power of the Supreme Pontiff in Temporal Matters”), a reply to William Barclay of Aberdeen’s De Potestate Papae (1609; “Concerning the Power of the Pope”), which denied all temporal power to the pope. Bellarmine’s autobiography first appeared in 1675. A complete edition of his works was published in 12 volumes (1870–74).
In addition to his significant theological contributions, Bellarmine took a personal interest in the poor, to whom he gave all his funds. He lived simply and with austerity and died a pauper.
