Saint Theophilus of Alexandria,  (flourished 5th century; feast day, Egyptian Coptic Church, October 15; in the Syrian Church, October 17), theologian and patriarch of Alexandria, Egypt, violent opponent of non-Christian religions, severe critic of heterodox influence among Christian writers and monks, and a major figure in the ecclesiastical politics of the Eastern Church of his day.
Reputed to have been an intellectually gifted student at Alexandria, Theophilus, a priest, was chosen patriarch in 385 and soon began a campaign to destroy the non-Christian religious shrines of North Africa. With the permission of the emperor Theodosius I, he destroyed the renowned temples to the gods Mithra, Dionysius, and Serapis. Endowed with a fiery temperament, Theophilus obliterated all vestiges of these pagan shrines with a vengeance, even including the levelling (391) of the Serapeum with its irreplaceable collection of classical literature. He used the stone from the temples to construct new Christian churches.
At first an adherent of the 3rd-century Christian Platonist Origen, Theophilus was challenged in 399 by a group of Egyptian monks on his statement approving Origen’s concept of an absolutely immaterial God. Concurring with certain of the monks’ anthropomorphic notions, he reversed his opinion two years later and denounced Origen’s writings. In his consequent persecution of Origenist monks, he personally commanded troops sent to destroy their desert monasteries.
Summoned to Constantinople to explain his actions, Theophilus, with implacable hostility, impugned the orthodoxy of John Chrysostom, the leading theologian, by implicating him in controverted points of Origenism. Successful in condemning and exiling Chrysostom at the Synod of the Oak in 403, Theophilus continued to play a principal role in the affairs of the Eastern Church and to further the influence of Alexandria over Constantinople. His nephew and successor as patriarch, Cyril, maintained the Alexandrian school as a bulwark of orthodoxy.
Although Theophilus is charged with ruthlessness by some of his contemporaries, others describe him as a sincere promoter of monasticism. He is honoured as a saint in the Egyptian Coptic and Syrian Churches. Theophilus’ writings survive only in part. His correspondence on the Origenism dispute includes a tract against Chrysostom and letters to the Latin biblical scholar Jerome and to popes Anastasius I and Innocent I. These and a collection of his liturgical and pastoral addresses, some translated into Latin by Jerome, are contained in Patrologia Graeca, edited by J.-P. Migne (1857–66), vol. 65.
