Saint Tikhon, Russian Svyatoy Tikhon, original name Vasily Ivanovich Belavin,  (born Dec. 19 [Dec. 31, New Style], 1865, Toropets, near Pskov, Russia—died April 7, 1925, Moscow; canonized Oct. 9, 1989), patriarch of the Russian Orthodox church following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. At first sharply resisting the new Soviet state’s antiecclesiastical legislation, he refused to cooperate with a schismatic, state-supported, and politically oriented element of the clergy known as the “Living Church,” but later, seeking a mitigation of government repression, he assumed a more flexible position.
The son of a Russian Orthodox priest, Vasily Belavin took a degree at St. Petersburg Theological Academy and, after becoming a monk in 1891, took the name Tikhon in the Russian Orthodox tradition. He rose quickly in the church; after a period of teaching, he became successively bishop of Lublin (now in Poland) in 1897 and of Alaska in 1898. From 1905 to 1907 he resided in New York City as bishop of the Russian Orthodox church in North America. In this capacity Tikhon adapted Russian ecclesiastical structure and worship to the local cultural milieu, decentralizing control, establishing several Russian Orthodox theological schools, and assisting with an English service book of the Russian Orthodox liturgy.
Tikhon returned to Russia in 1907 as bishop of Yaroslavl, near Moscow. He was elected metropolitan (archbishop) and patriarch of Moscow by the All-Russian Church Council assembled in August 1917 to reorganize the Orthodox church and restore the patriarchal office suppressed in 1721 by Tsar Peter I the Great. When the Bolsheviks came to power in 1917, they nationalized Orthodox church lands, took over all Orthodox schools and seminaries, withdrew all state subsidies to the church, and established exclusively civil marriages. In 1918 the Russian Orthodox church and the state were completely separated, and the church was dispossessed of its legal rights; this opened the way for many local attacks on priests and also led to the widespread looting of churches. Tikhon, who as patriarch wielded effective moral authority among the church membership, initially condemned the Soviet government’s actions, but during the 1918–22 civil war he declined any partisanship.
On intransigently opposing further government confiscation of church valuables during the famine of 1921–22, and because he was suspected of having conspired with emigrant clerics, Tikhon was imprisoned in a neighbouring monastery. He was not brought to trial, possibly because of English political pressure. With the failure of the Living Church movement to rally continued support from both people and government, he was released in June 1923 and allowed limited executive activity after signing an acknowledgment of the Soviet regime’s legitimacy and condemning all counterrevolutionary actions taken against it. Tikhon’s remaining years were spent in consolidating his control of the church and resolving internal conflicts fomented by remnants of the Living Church faction amid severe political harassment.
