Samuel, Hebrew Shmuʾel,  (flourished  11th century bc, Israel), religious hero in the history of Israel, represented in the Old Testament in every role of leadership open to a Jewish man of his day—seer, priest, judge, prophet, and military leader. His greatest distinction was his role in the establishment of the monarchy in Israel.
Information about Samuel is contained in The First Book of Samuel (called in the Roman Catholic canon The First Book of Kings). The ancient designation of the two books of Samuel does not indicate that he is the author (in fact, his death is related in 1 Samuel 25) or the hero of the books; indeed, it is difficult to deduce what the title was intended to mean.
Samuel, the son of Elkanah (of Ephraim) and Hannah, was born in answer to the prayer of his previously childless mother. In gratitude she dedicated him to the service of the chief sanctuary of Shiloh, in the charge of the priest Eli. As a boy Samuel received a divine oracle in which the fall of the house of Eli was predicted (1 Samuel 1–3). When he became an adult, Samuel inspired Israel to a great victory over the Philistines at Ebenezer (chapter 7). The proposal of the elders of Israel to install a king was indignantly rejected by Samuel as infidelity to Yahweh, the God of Israel (chapter 8). By the revelation of Yahweh, however, he anointed Saul king and installed him before all Israel (chapters 9–10). Saul was vindicated as king by his leadership of Israel in a campaign against the Ammonites (chapter 11); after this, Samuel retired from the leadership of Israel (chapter 12). He reappeared, however, to announce the oracle of Yahweh rejecting Saul as king, once for arrogating to himself the right of sacrifice (chapter 13) and a second time for failing to carry out the law of the ban—a primitive institution by which persons or objects were devoted to the deity, normally by destruction—against the Amalekites (chapter 15). By the oracle of Yahweh, Samuel secretly anointed David as king (chapter 16). He then faded into the background, appearing at the sanctuary of Naioth (chapter 19). He died, and his ghost was evoked by a necromancer, or sorceress, at the request of Saul; he then announced a third time the rejection of Saul (chapter 28).
Samuel thus appears as a leader in all Israel; his leadership is exercised in war and law, but his authority is basically religious, mostly prophetic, although with some features of priestly authority. He appears at first as being hostile to the monarchy and then as being favourable to it. He is the spokesman of Yahweh in the election both of Saul and of David. Yet, the picture is not entirely straightforward, and a close examination of the material, as conducted by a large number of critical historians, reveals inconsistencies that raise questions about both the history of Samuel and the sources in which this history has been preserved. The same examination reveals that none of the material in its present form was contemporary with the events; if one source is taken as controlling, then the other materials lose all historical value.
The two major divergences in The First Book of Samuel lie in those passages that critics call the “pro-monarchic” source (1 Samuel 9:1–10:16) and those passages called the “antimonarchic” source (1 Samuel 8 and 10:17–27). In the pro-monarchic account of the rise of Saul, Samuel is an obscure village seer (with distinct evidence of occult practices). The institution of the monarchy and the election of the king occur according to the will of Yahweh as revealed to Samuel. The story of the anointing, however, has no story of accession to complete it; instead, there is the account of Saul’s victory over the Ammonites. Examination discloses that this is still another account of Saul’s rise without an anointing story; Saul is chosen king as the judges—the leaders of the Israelites during their conquest of the land of Canaan—were chosen, by a charismatic display of military courage and leadership. Samuel was very probably intruded into this narrative.
The antimonarchic account presents a different picture of the kingship and of Saul and Samuel. In this account Samuel is a figure known through “all Israel” (a term of uncertain meaning at this period); his authority rests on his position as judge. The institution of kingship comes not from divine revelation but from the request of the elders of Israel, and this request is treated by Samuel as rebellion against Yahweh. The king is chosen not by divine election but by lot, implying that no special qualities were required, and the bashful candidate has to be summoned from a hiding place. This story is related to the account of Samuel as judge in chapters 7 and 12, and he is clearly presented as the last of the judges; it is indicated that the system of the judges was rejected by the Israelites not because of its failure but because of their worldliness. This tradition has two questionable features: Samuel is the only judge who is a permanent magistrate as well as a military leader, and his conclusive victory over the Philistines in chapter 7 cannot be historical, since it is contradicted by the subsequent military exploits of Saul and David.
The story of the birth and vocation of Samuel at the beginning of 1 Samuel is regarded by critics as legendary because of a number of obviously unhistorical features. This narrative is the major piece in establishing the role of Samuel as a prophet, but it is questionable whether the “prophet” as a distinct religious figure had emerged among the Israelites at this early date. The story is also at the root of the priestly role imposed on Samuel at a later date in 1 Chronicles 6; but this is an effort to explain in terms of the later priesthood the sacred functions performed by Samuel.
There are also two different accounts of the rejection of Saul by Samuel. The first story (1 Samuel 13) describes Samuel’s action as motivated by Saul’s assumption of the prerogatives of the priesthood. It is quite unlikely that either the powers of the king or the prerogatives of the priest were as closely defined as this in the early period. In the second story (chapter 15), Samuel is motivated by the failure of Saul to observe the ethic of the holy war. This story does not exhibit the same improbability. It seems that there was a firm tradition of a split between the two men but an inexact memory of the details.
