Sanctity of the cow,  in Hinduism, the belief that the cow is representative of divine and natural beneficence and should therefore be protected and venerated. The cow has also been associated with various deities, notably Shiva (whose steed is Nandi, a bull), Indra (closely associated with Kamadhenu, the wish-granting cow), Krishna (a cowherd in his youth), and goddesses in general (because of the maternal attributes of many of them).
The origin of the veneration of the cow can be traced to the Vedic period (2nd millennium–7th century bce). The Indo-European peoples who entered India in the 2nd millennium bce were pastoralists; cattle had major economic significance that was reflected in their religion. Though cattle were sacrificed and their flesh eaten in ancient India, the slaughter of milk-producing cows was increasingly prohibited. It is forbidden in parts of the Mahabharata, the great Sanskrit epic, and in the religious and ethical code known as the Manu-smirti (“Tradition of Manu”), and the milk cow was already in the Rigveda said to be “unslayable.” The degree of veneration afforded the cow is indicated by the use in rites of healing, purification, and penance of the panchagavya, the five products of the cow—milk, curd, butter, urine, and dung.
Subsequently, with the rise of the ideal of ahimsa (“noninjury”), the absence of the desire to harm living creatures, the cow came to symbolize a life of nonviolent generosity. In addition, because her products supplied nourishment, the cow was associated with motherhood and Mother Earth. The cow was also identified early on with the Brahman or priestly class, and killing the cow was sometimes equated (by Brahmans) with the heinous crime of killing a Brahman. In the middle of the 1st millennium ce, cow killing was made a capital offense by the Gupta kings, and legislation against cow killing persisted into the 20th century in many princely states where the monarch was Hindu.
In the late 19th century, especially in northern India, a movement to protect cows arose that strove to unify Hindus and distinguish them from Muslims by demanding that the government ban cow slaughter. This intertwining of political and religious purpose led periodically to anti-Muslim riots and eventually played a role in the partition of the Indian subcontinent in 1947.
