School of Nisibis,  intellectual centre of East Syrian Christianity (the Nestorian Church) from the 5th to the 7th century. The School of Nisibis (now Nusaybin, Tur.) originated soon after 471, when Narsai, a renowned teacher and administrator at the School of Edessa, and his companions were forced to leave Edessa (modern Urfa, Tur.) because of theological disputes. Under Narsai’s directorship (471–496), a number of former teachers and students from the School of Edessa were enlisted in the new institution; they gave shape to Christianity according to the Nestorian creed, which so stressed the independence of the divine and human natures of Christ that the natures seemed in effect two persons loosely joined in a moral union.
The school experienced tremendous growth during Abraham de Bet Rabban’s tenure (until c. 569) as director. Its teachers wrote in the fields of literature, history, philology, and theology, as well as translating from Greek into Syriac. The school gained renown in the West and became a major centre of education for members of the clergy and hierarchy. It was primarily through Syriac translations that the Arabs became acquainted with Greek thought.
The Nestorian theology of the school, however, was undermined by the administration of Ḥenānā (c. 570–c. 609), who preferred Origen (a Christian theologian who flourished in the early 3rd century) to Theodore of Mopsuestia, the recognized Nestorian authority. Ḥenānā’s views led to a revolt by students, and the director required royal support to maintain his position.
The only outstanding figure after Ḥenānā was Surin, who held office for some time in the second quarter of the 7th century. His literary work must have created considerable attention, and its vitality sustained the school in its subsequent history of decline, especially in the areas of historiography and monastico-historical inquiry. The school was unable to retain its preeminence among other schools and was superseded by the school of Seleucia-Ctesiphon.
