Shenouda III, original name Nazeer Gayed Roufail,  (born August 3, 1923, Asyūṭ, Egypt—died March 17, 2012, Cairo), 117th pope of Alexandria and patriarch of the see of St. Mark. As the leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, an autocephalous (ecclesiastically independent) church of the Oriental Orthodox communion, Shenouda expanded the church’s membership both in Egypt and abroad while generally improving ecumenical relations, particularly with the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox churches. However, his papacy was marked by controversy and even a brief exile.
Shenouda was born Nazeer Gayed and raised in a Coptic (Egyptian Christian) family in northern Egypt. After receiving a bachelor’s degree in history from Cairo University (1947), he taught social studies and English in high school while studying theology at Coptic Orthodox Theological Seminary. He obtained a bachelor of theology degree in 1949 and then joined the seminary’s faculty, becoming a lecturer in biblical studies. In 1954 he moved to the desert, taking monastic vows and the name Antonious El-Syriani. In an act of devotion, he constructed the desert cave in which he lived for a time in contemplation.
In 1962 Antonious was consecrated a bishop by Pope Cyril VI, and at that time he took the name Shenouda in honour of the 4th-century Coptic scholar and theologian St. Shenouda the Archimandrite. The new bishop was given the title Bishop for Christian Education and was granted jurisdiction over matters pertaining to theological education; he was also named president of Coptic Orthodox Theological Seminary and continued to teach. Because of his controversial beliefs, including his conviction that lay members of the church should be allowed to choose their priests and bishops, Shenouda was briefly suspended from his duties by Cyril in 1966 but was soon reinstated. That year he also became editor in chief of the church’s official magazine, El-Keraza (“Preaching”), a post he held until his death. In 1971, after Cyril’s death, Shenouda was elected pope.
From his consecration Shenouda reached out to other Christian churches. Under Shenouda the Coptic Orthodox Church increased its profile and activity in the World Council of Churches (WCC); the church had been one of the organization’s founding members in 1948. One of his first major actions as pope was to improve relations between the Coptic church and the Roman Catholic Church, which had been strained since the Council of Chalcedon in 451. The Coptic and other “Oriental” churches (Ethiopian, Armenian, and Syriac) had rejected the council’s statement on Christology (theological doctrine concerning the person and work of Jesus Christ) and were subsequently regarded in the West as heretical monophysites (believers in the doctrine that Jesus Christ had only a divine nature), though the Oriental churches vehemently denied the charge. In the second half of the 20th century, many of the Oriental Orthodox, or “non-Chalcedonian,” churches initiated dialogue with Eastern Orthodox churches with the aim of finally resolving the Christological issues. In 1973 Shenouda met the Roman Catholic pope Paul VI, becoming the first Coptic pope to visit Rome in more than 1,500 years. Shenouda and Paul began discussions that helped to resolve many of the ancient disputes and signed a joint statement affirming many tenets of Christology. Shenouda also helped to organize talks between the Oriental and Eastern Orthodox churches. In 1989 an Egyptian Coptic monastery hosted a meeting between representatives of Eastern Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy at which the two groups signed a joint Christological statement.
Shenouda increased the church’s profile outside the Middle East. In 1977 he became the first Coptic pope to visit the United States, and in 1996 the church appointed the first two U.S. diocesan bishops. Diocesan bishops were also appointed in Canada, Australia, and several South American countries.
Yet, despite that ecumenical impulse, relations with other churches during Shenouda’s reign were not without tension. In 1976 the Coptic Orthodox Church broke ties with the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, a fellow Oriental Orthodox church, after the new Marxist government of Ethiopia deposed the Ethiopian patriarch and installed a replacement. Relations with the Ethiopian church were further strained when, in the wake of Eritrea’s declaration of independence in 1993, Orthodox faithful in Eritrea appealed to Shenouda, who had honorary primacy among the Oriental Orthodox in Africa, for autocephalacy. Shenouda appointed a patriarch in 1994, and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church became autocephalous in 1998. Relations between the Coptic and Ethiopian churches improved in 2007, though the churches had remained in full communion (members of each congregation could receive sacraments in the other) throughout the rift.
Shenouda’s outspoken criticism of Israel, particularly for its treatment of Palestinians, was hailed by some Copts but rejected by others. When Egyptian President Anwar Sadat announced a peace treaty with Israel in 1979, Shenouda banned Copts from making pilgrimages to holy sites in Israel. He said publicly that Muslims and Christians should enter the Holy Land “arm-in-arm,” and in 2001 he declared that he would enter Israel only on a Palestinian visa. In his criticism of Israel, Shenouda occasionally made comments about Judaism that some interpreted as anti-Semitic.
Because he represented a prominent religious minority in a predominantly Islamic country, Shenouda attempted to cultivate good relations with the Egyptian government. His relationship with Sadat began amicably but soon cooled, however.  While Sadat attempted to broker peace with Israel in 1977–78, Shenouda renewed his sharp public criticism of Israel. When Copts were attacked by Islamic groups, Shenouda blamed Sadat for not doing enough to stop the violence. The relationship between the two leaders became increasingly tumultuous. In September 1981, following a row concerning public celebrations of Easter, Sadat dethroned Shenouda and exiled him to a desert monastery, installing Matta el-Meskin, Shenouda’s former teacher and then critic, as pope. After Sadat was assassinated in October 1981, his successor, Hosni Mubarak, eventually ended Shenouda’s exile and restored him to the papacy in 1985. Shenouda’s generally warm relationship with the authoritarian Mubarak was criticized by some Copts, particularly when Shenouda endorsed Mubarak’s reelection in 2005. When Islamic extremists killed 21 Copts by bombing an Egyptian church in January 2011, however, Shenouda rebuked Mubarak’s regime for not maintaining peace. After mass protests during the Egyptian Arab Spring led to Mubarak’s ouster in February 2011 (see Egypt Uprising of 2011), Shenouda, though in ill health, publicly praised the protesters.
Shenouda was a prolific author, writing more than 100 books and many articles on Coptic Orthodox theology and ethics. Under his long reign the Coptic church expanded greatly in Egypt, representing about 10 percent of the population by the first decade of the 21st century. Shenouda also witnessed the establishment of significant Coptic communities abroad, particularly in North and South America and the United Kingdom. Despite his continued support of an increasingly unpopular leader, Mubarak, he was respected in Egypt by Christians and Muslims alike.
