Sister Helen Prejean,  (born April 21, 1939, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, U.S.), American nun, who was a leader in the movement to abolish the death penalty. Prejean worked actively on behalf of both death row inmates and family members of murder victims.
Prejean became a member of the Roman Catholic religious order the Sisters of St. Joseph of Medaille (now part of the Congregation of St. Joseph) in 1957. She earned a B.A. in English and education from St. Mary’s Dominican College, New Orleans, in 1962 and an M.A. in religious education from Saint Paul University in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, in 1973. She began her career as a religious education teacher but soon felt called to serve the poor and the disenfranchised. A request to become a pen pal to Elmo Patrick Sonnier, a Louisiana death row inmate, in 1981 marked the beginning of her death row ministry and her campaign against the death penalty.
Her first book, Dead Man Walking: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United States (1994), narrated her experiences as a spiritual adviser to two condemned men, Sonnier and Robert Willie, both of whom she accompanied to the death chamber. The book described her early years of involvement with those affected by capital punishment, including family members of death row inmates, family members of murder victims, prison officials, lawyers, activists, and the inmates themselves. It was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize and became a number-one New York Times best seller. Prejean’s book was adapted into a feature-length film in 1995, starring Susan Sarandon as Prejean and Sean Penn as a death row inmate and directed by Tim Robbins. It premiered in 2000 as an opera composed by Jake Heggie with a libretto by Terrence McNally.
Like Dead Man Walking, Prejean’s second book, The Death of Innocents: An Eyewitness Account of Wrongful Executions (2005), detailed some of Prejean’s personal experiences while ministering on death row but also attacked flaws in the American legal system that allowed innocent people to be executed. In 2019 she published her memoir, River of Fire: My Spiritual Journey.
Prejean won numerous honours and awards for her work and was nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize. She runs her organization, Ministry Against the Death Penalty, from New Orleans. In 2015 she testified on behalf of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, with whom she met five times in jail and who was sentenced to death for the Boston Marathon bombing of 2013.
