Socinian,  member of a Christian group in the 16th century that embraced the thought of the Italian-born theologian Faustus Socinus. The Socinians referred to themselves as “brethren” and were known by the latter half of the 17th century as “Unitarians” or “Polish Brethren.” They accepted Jesus as God’s revelation but still a mere man, divine by office rather than by nature; Socinians thus rejected the doctrine of the Trinity. One of the Socinians’ doctrines was that the soul dies with the body but the souls of those who have persevered in obeying Jesus’ commandments will be resurrected. The Socinians also advocated the separation of church and state, stressed the importance of the moral life, minimized dogma, and held that Christian doctrine must be rational.
The movement originated in Italy with the thought of Laelius Socinus (Socini) and his nephew Faustus Socinus. In 1579 Faustus resettled in Poland and became a leader in the previously established Minor Reformed Church (Polish Brethren). Socinus succeeded in converting this movement to his own theological system, and for 50 years after his arrival, the Minor Church had a brilliant life in Poland, with about 300 congregations at its height. The movement’s intellectual centre was at Racow, north of Kraków, where the Socinians founded a successful university and a famous printing operation that turned out many Socinian books and pamphlets. This press issued the Racovian Catechism (1605), which formally enunciated the Socinian creed.
In 1638, however, in response to the Counter-Reformation, the Polish Diet closed the academy and the press at Racow, and in 1658 the Diet gave the Socinians the choice of either conformity to Roman Catholic doctrine or forced exile or death. A mass migration of Socinians ensued, chiefly to Transylvania, the Netherlands, Germany, and England, while in Poland the movement came to a complete end. Some small Socinian groups survived in Europe until the 19th century, primarily in Transylvania, and in England. Socinian ideas influenced John Biddle, the father of English Unitarianism.
