Sophronius,   (born c. 560, Damascus [Syria]—died  March 11, 638, Jerusalem), patriarch of Jerusalem, monk, and theologian who was the chief protagonist for orthodox teaching in the doctrinal controversy on the essential nature of Christ and his volitional acts.
A teacher of rhetoric, Sophronius became an ascetic in Egypt about 580 and then entered the monastery of St. Theodosius in Jerusalem. Journeying to monastic centres in Asia Minor, Egypt, and Rome, he accompanied the Byzantine chronicler John Moschus, who dedicated to him his celebrated tract on the religious life, Leimōn ho Leimōnon (Greek: “The Spiritual Meadow”). On the death of Moschus in Rome (619), Sophronius accompanied the body back to Jerusalem for monastic burial. He traveled to Alexandria, Egypt, and to Constantinople during 633 to persuade the respective patriarchs to renounce Monothelitism, a heterodox teaching that posited a single, divine will in Christ to the exclusion of a human capacity for choice. Sophronius’ extensive writings on this question are all lost.
Although unsuccessful in this mission, Sophronius was elected patriarch of Jerusalem in 634. Soon after his enthronement he forwarded his noted synodical letter to Pope Honorius I and to the Eastern patriarchs, explaining the orthodox belief in the two natures (human and divine) of Christ, as opposed to Monothelitism, which he viewed as a subtle form of heretical Monophysitism (which posited a single [divine] nature for Christ). Moreover, he composed a Florilegium (“Anthology”) of some 600 texts from the Greek Church Fathers in favour of the orthodox tenet of Dyotheletism (positing both human and divine wills in Christ). This document also is lost.
Sophronius noted the Saracen menace to Palestine in his Christmas sermon of 634, in which he commented that the Arabs already controlled Bethlehem. The fall of Jerusalem to ʿUmar I’s Saracen forces in 637 probably hastened Sophronius’ death after he had negotiated the recognition of civil and religious liberty for Christians in exchange for tribute.
Beside polemics, Sophronius’ writings included an encomium on the Alexandrian martyrs Cyrus and John in gratitude for an extraordinary cure of his failing vision. He also wrote 23 Anacreontic (classical metre) odes on such themes as the Saracen siege of Jerusalem and on various liturgical celebrations.
