Tarcisio Cardinal Bertone,  (born December 2, 1934, Romano Canavese, Italy), cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church and Vatican secretary of state (2006–13).
Bertone was ordained a priest in the Salesian order in 1960. He was professor of moral theology and canon law at Pontifical Salesian University in Rome between 1967 and 1991. Meanwhile, he contributed to the 1983 revision of the Code of Canon Law and served as consultant to several church bodies, including the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, the Vatican office responsible for preserving Catholic doctrine and evaluating according to canon law the warrant for disciplinary action against clergy. In 1995 Bertone was appointed secretary of the Congregation, a position in which he worked closely with Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, who at that time was the body’s prefect. He also served as archbishop of Vercelli (1991–95) and then of Genoa (2002–06). In 2003 he was created a cardinal by Pope John Paul II, and in 2006 Ratzinger, then Pope Benedict XVI, appointed him secretary of state, the functional equivalent of a prime minister and the second highest position in the church hierarchy. In 2007 he was also appointed camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church, a position that placed him in charge of church finances and property.
Before becoming Vatican secretary of state, Bertone repudiated what he perceived as outside attacks against the church, especially by the media and in popular culture. As secretary of state, Bertone continued to respond to media and secular critiques of the church. His tenure in office was marked by several controversies. His first task upon assuming office was to issue a public statement intended to defuse rapidly mounting criticism over comments Benedict had made in Germany only days before that many in the Islamic world had interpreted as being critical of the Prophet Muhammad and insensitive toward Islam. Later that year Bertone rebutted claims by Aleksey II, patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church, that Catholics had been proselytizing its members in Russia, Ukraine, and other republics that had been part of the former Soviet Union. In 2007 he denounced claims that Pope Pius XII had appeased Adolf Hitler and had not intervened on behalf of Jews who suffered and died during the Holocaust. That year he also criticized media coverage of the church’s sexual abuse scandal as being disproportionately negative and biased. In 2010 the tradition of celibacy among Catholic priests attracted scrutiny after reports emerged of decades of sexual abuse of parishioners, particularly of children, by priests in Ireland, Austria, and Germany. In response, Bertone issued a widely criticized statement that not only defended celibacy among priests but was interpreted as generally linking pedophilia and male homosexuality.
Bertone’s tenure as secretary of state was marked by security and financial scandals that prompted criticism of his management of the Roman Curia (the church’s administrative body) and the Vatican central bank. The most-notable security incident, the so-called “Vatileaks” scandal, involved the arrest in 2012 of Benedict’s butler for stealing confidential Vatican correspondence and documents. Bertone remained in office following the resignation of Benedict in February 2013 and the installation of Francis I in March. He retired as secretary of state in October. The following year the 80-year-old Bertone stepped down as camerlengo.
