Tenrikyō,   (Japanese: “Religion of Divine Wisdom”), largest and most successful of the modern Shintō sects in Japan. Though founded in the 19th century, it is often considered in connection with the evangelistic “new religions” of contemporary Japan.
Tenrikyō originated with Nakayama Miki (1798–1887), a charismatic peasant from Yamato Province (modern Nara Prefecture), who claimed she became possessed by a god called Tenri Ō no Mikoto (“Lord of Divine Wisdom”) when she was 40 years old. She developed a worship characterized by ecstatic dancing and shamanistic practices, and a simple doctrine (based on the oracles transmitted through her) emphasizing charity and the healing of disease through mental acts of faith. The sect became popular in her lifetime, though it often met with persecution from state authorities. Her writings and her deeds were considered divine models, and she was widely venerated during her lifetime and since. The founder, Nakayama, was succeeded by Master Iburi (d. 1907); since his death, the leader of the sect has always been a member of the Nakayama family.
Tenrikyō was first considered a branch of the Yoshida sect of Shintō. In 1880 it changed its affiliation to Buddhism and from 1908 has been recognized as one of the 13 groups that compose Kyōha Shintō (q.v.). Tenrikyō was one of the most powerful religious movements in Japan immediately before World War II and has retained a large following. In 1980 its membership was about 2,500,000.
The goal of Tenrikyō is a happy life free from disease and suffering. The modern sect emphasizes modern medical care. The centre of religious activity is the jiba, a sacred recess in the sanctuary of the main temple in Tenri city (Nara Prefecture). The world is said to have been created here, and from the jiba salvation will finally be extended to the entire world. Every member of Tenrikyō is expected to carry on missionary work. In the propagation of its teaching, the sect has founded a radio station, a university, and an outstanding library. More than 200 churches have been established in other countries, including the United States, Brazil, Korea, China, the Philippines; they serve mainly Japanese living abroad.
