The Book of Ezekiel, also called The Prophecy of Ezechiel,  one of the major prophetical books of the Old Testament. According to dates given in the text, Ezekiel received his prophetic call in the fifth year of the first deportation to Babylonia (592 bc) and was active until about 570 bc. Most of this time was spent in exile.
The literary history of the book is much debated, but its final form exhibits a threefold theme: threats against Judah and Jerusalem (chapters 1–25), threats against foreign nations (chapters 25–32), and prophecies of restoration and hope (chapters 33–44). Dates supplied throughout the book indicate that this arrangement of materials roughly corresponds to the chronological development of Ezekiel’s ministry (although the arrangement also suggests a threefold eschatological [end of the world] theme that has led some scholars to question the traditional dates). The threats against Judah and Jerusalem belong to the period from Ezekiel’s call (593 bc) to the fall of Jerusalem (586 bc); the threats against the foreign nations belong to the period immediately after the fall (586–585 bc); and the prophecies of restoration belong to the period thereafter. Most of the material is undoubtedly genuine, although a few later additions are discernible.
The book is valuable for understanding the life of the exiles of Babylon. Having been cut off from Jerusalem and its Temple where alone Yahweh dwelled and could be worshipped, the deportees were faced with a crisis of faith and practice. Ezekiel attempted to sustain his fellow exiles by striving to keep alive their traditional religious beliefs and by fostering a spirit of unity with one another. His prophecies did much to dispel the notion that Yahweh dwelled exclusively in Jerusalem; he emphasized the importance of individual responsibility, and he urged that the sabbath be kept holy by cessation from work—for the holiness of the day was a special sign of Yahweh’s relationship with his people. By being faithful, the exiles were promised that Israel would be restored.
