the Bāb, byname of Mīrzā ʿAlī Moḥammad of Shīrāz,  (born October 20, 1819, or October 9, 1820, Shīrāz, Iran—died July 9, 1850, Tabrīz), merchant’s son whose claim to be the Bāb (Gateway) to the hidden imām (the perfect embodiment of Islamic faith) gave rise to the Bābī religion and made him one of the three central figures of the Bahāʾī Faith.
At an early age, ʿAlī Moḥammad became familiar with the Shaykhī school of the Shīʿite branch of Islam and with its leader, Sayyid Kāẓim Rashtī, whom he had met on a pilgrimage to Karbalāʾ (in modern Iraq). ʿAlī Moḥammad borrowed heavily from the Shaykhīs’ teaching in formulating his own doctrine, and they, especially Sayyid Kāẓim’s disciple Mullā Ḥusayn, seem to have encouraged his proclamation of himself as the Bāb. Traditionally, the Bāb had been considered to be a spokesman for the 12th and last imām, or leader of Shīʿite Islam, believed to be in hiding since the 9th century; since that time, others had assumed the title of Bāb. Such a proclamation fit in well with the Shaykhīs’ interest in the coming of the mahdī, or messianic deliverer.
It was on May 23, 1844, that ʿAlī Moḥammad, in an inspired fervour, wrote and simultaneously intoned a commentary, the Qayyūm al-asmāʾ, on the sūrah (“chapter”) of Joseph from the Qurʾān. This event prompted ʿAlī Moḥammad, supported by Mullā Ḥusayn, to declare himself the Bāb. The same year he assembled 18 disciples, who along with him added up to the sacred Bābī number 19 and were called ḥurūf al-ḥayy (“letters of the living”). They became apostles of the new faith in the various Persian provinces.
The six-year career of the Bāb, who had popular support, was marked by a struggle for official recognition and by a series of imprisonments. He was suspected of fomenting insurrection, and some of his followers engaged in bloody uprisings. He had to do battle with the mujtahids and mullahs, members of the religious class, who were unreceptive to the idea of a Bāb who would supersede their authority and provide another avenue to the Truth. Accordingly, his missionaries were arrested and expelled from Shīrāz, and the Bāb was arrested in Shīrāz and imprisoned in the fortress of Māhkū (1847) and later in the castle of Chehrīq (1848), where he remained until his execution. Assembling at the convention of Badasht in 1848, the Bāb’s followers declared a formal break with Islam.
The personality of the man was such that he could win over the shah’s envoy who was sent to investigate the movement, as well as the governor of Eṣfahān, who protected him in that city, and even the governor of the fortress of Māhkū, where he was first confined. Nonetheless, a committee of mujtahids decided he was dangerous to the existing order and demanded his execution. On the first volley from the firing squad he escaped injury; only the ropes binding him were severed, a circumstance that was interpreted as a divine sign. On the second volley he was killed and his body disposed of in a ditch. Several years later it was buried by the Bahāʾīs in a mausoleum on Mount Carmel, in Palestine.
Late in his active period, ʿAlī Moḥammad had abandoned the title Bāb and considered himself no longer merely the “gateway” to the expected 12th imām (imām-mahdī) but to be the imām himself, or the qāʾim. Later he declared himself the nuqṭah (“point”) and finally an actual divine manifestation. Among his followers, Bābīs and later Azalīs, he is known as noqṭey-e ūlā (“primal point”), ḥazrat-e aʿlā (“supreme presence”), jamāl-e mobārak (“blessed perfection”), and even ḥaqq taʿālā (“truth almighty”). The Bahāʾīs identify him both as a forerunner of Bahāʾ Allāh—the founder of the Bahāʾī Faith—and as a prophet in his own right. He is generally referred to as the Bāb by Bahāʾīs, but some Bahāʾīs also use the names adopted by the Bābīs and Azalīs.
The Bāb wrote a great many works not only in his native Persian but also in Arabic. Among the most important and most sacred are the Arabic and the longer Persian versions of his Bayān. Although these are the holy books of Bābī revelation, all the writings of the Bāb and his successors are considered divinely inspired and equally binding.
