Theodosius I Boradiotes,   (born, Antioch—died  after 1183, Constantinople), Greek Orthodox patriarch of Constantinople (1179–83), inflexible opponent of the Muslim religion, critic of union with the Latin Church of the West, and guardian of Orthodox morality at the Byzantine court.
Of Armenian stock, Theodosius came to the partiarchal throne early in 1179. An open dispute arose concerning the oath of recantation required of Muslim converts to Christianity. The conservative Byzantine churchmen, including Theodosius and the scholarly metropolitan (archbishop), Eustathius of Thessalonica, upheld the stringent wording of the oath that required Christianized Muslims to renounce the Islāmic deity (Allāh) as a theos holosphyros (“wholly compacted God”; i.e., absolutely monotheistic, with no differentiation of persons). Emperor Manuel I Comnenus, having unsuccessfully attempted to check the military incursions of the Seljuq Turks in 1176, considered the abjuration formula offensive to the Islāmic people. The Orthodox hierarchy presented an uncompromising front to Manuel I at a synod in Constantinople c. 1180, and Theodosius succeeded in persuading the physically weakened emperor to abandon his intention of rewriting the oath.
When Emperor Manuel, attempting a policy of invigorating Byzantium with an infusion of Latin blood, initiated cordial relations with Pope Alexander III, offering the possibility of reuniting the Greek and Latin churches, Theodosius apparently refused to cooperate. The patriarch consequently survived the turbulent period following Manuel I’s death, when the populace rose up to massacre all Latins in Constantinople, although he protested the violation of the rights of sanctuary by the rival political factions.
With the overthrow of the crown prince Alexius by his cousin, Andronicus I Comnenus, Theodosius agreed to the expulsion of the Latin empress-mother and regent, Mary of Antioch. Later Theodosius incurred the enmity of Emperor Andronicus, who sought ecclesiastical sanction for the marriage of his illegitimate daughter Irene to Alexius. Appealing to Orthodox decrees prohibiting such a union, Theodosius refused to acquiesce to the Emperor’s designs and was forced to abdicate his patriarchal office; he retired to an outlying monastery.
