Thetan,  in Scientology, the authentic spiritual identity of an individual. It is similar to the soul, whose existence is taught by many religious traditions.
L. Ron Hubbard (1911–86), Scientology’s founder, spoke of the experience of “exteriorization,” the separation of individual consciousness from the body. His own experience of exteriorization led him to posit the spiritual self, the thetan, as the true self that could exist apart from the body. He also taught that thetans had inhabited other bodies before their present one, a concept not unlike that of reincarnation in Eastern religions. The idea of the thetan led Hubbard to postulate a comprehensive vision of the cosmos that had much in common with Eastern faiths and closely resembled the Western gnostic tradition.
Hubbard suggested that thetans had originated billions of years ago with the original Cause, whose entire purpose was the creation of effect. Thetans emerged early in the process of creation, and their interaction led to the creation of MEST (matter, energy, space, and time), thus making the visible universe possible. Over time, the thetans fell into MEST and were trapped. They experienced events that stripped them of their creative abilities. Engrams, or images of these past events, exerted a negative emotional influence on the thetans’ minds, causing them to lose the memories of who they were. Eventually, the thetans’ movements through the MEST universe brought them to Earth as humans.
The Church of Scientology asserts that through training its members come to understand both themselves as spiritual beings and engrams as energy clusters that inhibit the thetan from functioning freely. Hubbard believed that the fundamental purpose of religion is to provide a process of freeing the individual. Consequently, Scientology is concerned with assisting the individual in becoming “clear,” or free from the destructive influence of engrams. An operating thetan (OT) is one who not only is free from engrams but also operates as a fully conscious and functioning thetan according to the church’s most sacred teachings.
