Thomas Erastus, original name Thomas Lüber, Lieber, or Liebler,  (born Sept. 7, 1524, Baden, Switz.—died  Dec. 31, 1583, Basel), Swiss physician and religious controversialist whose name is preserved in Erastianism, a doctrine of church-state relationship that he himself never taught.
A student of philosophy and medicine for nine years, Erastus was invited in 1557 by the elector Otto Heinrich of the Palatinate to be professor of therapeutics in the new faculty of medicine at the University of Heidelberg. There he quickly achieved a favourable reputation as a physician and a teacher. As a supporter of the church reforms advocated by the Swiss theologian Huldrych Zwingli, Erastus became closely associated with the introduction of Reformed Protestantism into the Palatinate during the electorate of Frederick III (1559–76). In debates over the Eucharist, the sacrament deriving from the Lord’s Supper, he defended the Zwinglian view that Christ’s body is present in the sacramental bread only symbolically, in contrast to Luther’s view that his body is really present.
The central controversy in Erastus’ life came to a head after he had opposed efforts by Calvinists in the Palatinate to impose the system of church discipline that had been established by John Calvin at Geneva and elsewhere. When in 1568 a set of theses was presented at Heidelberg by the English Puritan George Withers, who affirmed both the presbyterian system of church government (assemblies of elected representatives) and the practice of excommunication, Erastus drew up 100 theses (later reduced to 75) to refute him. Erastus maintained that excommunication is unscriptural, that the sacraments should not be withheld from anyone genuinely wishing to receive them, and that in a Christian society—and Erastus explicitly limited his argument in this manner—the punishment of sins is in the hands of the civil magistrates. Because the Calvinists had the support of the elector, however, the presbyterian system was established by electoral decree in 1570.
For his opposition to the new order and also for alleged tendencies away from the doctrine of the Trinity toward Unitarianism, Erastus was excommunicated for two years. He was forced to leave Heidelberg when Lutheranism was reinstituted under the elector Louis VI (1576–83). On his return to Basel, he was appointed professor of medicine there in 1580 and of ethics in 1582. The term Erastian evidently came into use first in 1643 in England; Presbyterians used it as a term of abuse for those who urged state supremacy.
The significance of Erastus’ theses, which were published posthumously in 1589 under the title Explicatio gravissimae quaestionis…, was reflected by their numerous translations: in 1659 as The Nullity of Church Censures, in 1682 as A Treatise of Excommunication, and in 1844 in a Scottish edition. Erastus also wrote several medical and scientific treatises in which he attacked such popular superstitions as the belief in astrology and in alchemical transmutation of metals. He himself, however, shared the contemporary belief in witchcraft, which he opposed in his Repetitio disputationis de lamiis seu strigibus (1578; “Repetition of the Disputation Against Witches”), a defense of the use of the death penalty against witches and sorcerers.
