Thomas Christians, also called St. Thomas Christians, Mar Thoma Christians, or Malabar Christians,  indigenous Indian Christian groups who have traditionally lived in Kerala, a state on the Malabar Coast, in southwestern India. Claiming to have been evangelized by St. Thomas the Apostle, Thomas Christians ecclesiastically, liturgically, and linguistically represent one of the oldest Christian traditions in the world, particularly in Christianity outside the West. Although they no longer form a single institutional church, Thomas Christians altogether constitute a vibrant religious community. In the early 21st century there were about four million Thomas Christians in India, mainly within Kerala, and a small worldwide diaspora.
By ancient belief and canonical doctrine, Thomas Christians trace their origins to the arrival of St. Thomas at Malankara, on a lagoon near present-day Kodungallur (Cranganore; near ancient Muziris) in 52 ce and to congregations he established in seven villages. That the historicity of this advent cannot be verified does not gainsay evidence—such as extant inscriptions on stone crosses and on copper plates—that Christians have been on the Malabar Coast since the 2nd or 3rd century. The Thomas tradition of India is embellished by the epic fantasy Acts of Thomas, which links Thomas to Gondophernes (reigned c. 19–55 ce), the Indo-Parthian king who ruled in the Punjab rather than on the Malabar Coast; by oral traditions contained in such works as the Thomma Parvam (“Song of Thomas”) and such other songs as the “Margam Kali Pattu” and the “Rabban Pattu,” all composed in the native Malayalam language; and by epigraphic remains. Tradition holds that Thomas was martyred in or near Mylapore (within present-day Chennai) in 72 ce.
Among waves of Christian refugees who later settled on the Malabar Coast was a community of 400 Syriac-speaking Jewish-Christian families from Uruhu, near Babylon. That community—traditionally said to have been led by Thomas Kināyi (also called Thomas of Cana), a merchant-warrior; Uruhu Mar Yusuf, a bishop; and four pastors—settled on the south bank of the Periyar River. That arrival of the Malankara Nazarani, as they are referred to in Malayalam (Nazarani is derived from a Syriac term for Nazarene, indicating a Christian), in the 4th century is celebrated in their epics, such as the Muraroruvant Kalpanayala and the Nallororsilam and in the song “Kottayam Valiyapally.” The exclusive “Southists” (Tekkumbhagar), as distinct from the older “Northists” (Vatakkumbhagar), blended Christian faith and Hindu culture with Syriac doctrine, ecclesiology, and ritual. The local social status of the Southists paralleled that of elite Brahman and Nayar castes in Kerala. Other Christian refugees, fleeing Islamic oppression in Arab and Persian lands, came to Kerala beginning in the 7th and 8th centuries.
India’s ancient Christians looked to the Assyrian Church of the East (often disparaged as “Nestorian” by Western or Roman Catholic Christians, who associated it with the anathematized bishop Nestorius) and its catholicos (or patriarch) for ecclesiastical authority and to centres of learning in Edessa and Nisibis for instruction.
As the Thomas Christian community grew, its members enjoyed about a millennium of theological and ecclesiastical cohesion and unity. That state of affairs changed after the Portuguese arrival. In April 1498 two Thomas Christians piloted Vasco da Gama’s small fleet from Melinda (East Africa) to Calicut (present-day Kozhikode), an event recorded by two Thomas Christian metrans (Malayam for “bishop”). Half a century later two more Thomas Christians made it possible for the Jesuit missionary St. Francis Xavier to bring shoreline fisherfolk, the Paravars and Mukkavars, into the Roman Catholic fold. Nevertheless, harmonious relations with the Catholics did not last. After 1561, Thomas Christians were branded heretics by the Goa Inquisition, which had been established under Portuguese rule. The 1599 Synod of Diamper (Udayamperoor) anathematized the catholicos of Chaldea and all Christians of India who did not submit to Rome. Ancient churches were destroyed, libraries were burned, and clerics from Mesopotamia were intercepted, imprisoned, and executed.
Yet, eventually, ancient skills of silent resistance and subversion wore out one prelate after another. In 1653 anti-Catholic kattanars met at Koonen (“Crooked”) Cross, a granite monument at Mattancheri. There they swore an oath to never again accept another farangi (European) prelate and installed their own high metran (patriarch). Archdeacon (Ramban) Parambil Tumi became their first indigenous prelate, taking the title Mar Thoma I (Mar is a Syriac term meaning “Saint”). A schism occurred, with some Thomas Christian clergy remaining Roman Catholic while others divided between East Syrian (more closely affiliated with the Assyrian Church of the East) and West Syrian (called Jacoba, after the evangelist Jacob Baradaeus) authority. The unity that Thomas Christians had enjoyed for a thousand years ended in the proliferation of ever more denominations.
