Titus Oates,  (born Sept. 15, 1649, Oakham, Rutland, Eng.—died  July 12/13, 1705, London), renegade Anglican priest who fabricated the Popish Plot of 1678. Oates’s allegations that Roman Catholics were plotting to seize power caused a reign of terror in London and strengthened the anti-Catholic Whig Party.
The son of a Baptist preacher, Oates was expelled from the Merchant Taylors School, London, in 1665. Although he managed to be ordained into the Church of England, he was imprisoned for perjury while serving as a curate in Hastings in 1674. He escaped and joined the navy as a chaplain but was soon dismissed for misconduct.
Nevertheless, early in 1677 Oates became chaplain to the Protestants in the household of the Roman Catholic Henry Howard, 6th Duke of Norfolk. There he had his first extensive contacts with Catholic circles. At the same time, his new acquaintance, the fanatical anti-Jesuit Israel Tonge, urged him to profit by betraying Catholics to the government. Oates, therefore, set out to gather information about them and their activities. He joined the Roman Catholic church in March 1677, but before long he was expelled from seminaries at Valladolid in Spain and at Saint-Omer in France. Returning to London in 1678 he rejoined Tonge, and the pair invented an account of a vast Jesuit conspiracy to assassinate King Charles II and place his Roman Catholic brother James, Duke of York, on the throne. They publicized the tale through a prominent justice of the peace, Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, and their revelations seemed even more plausible after Godfrey was found murdered in October 1678.
In the wave of terror that swept London, Oates was hailed as the saviour of his country, though Charles himself examined Oates and found his story unconvincing. His testimony was responsible for the execution of some 35 persons, but, as the frenzy subsided, inconsistencies were discovered in his story. In June 1684 the Duke of York was awarded damages of £100,000 in a libel suit against Oates. After the Duke of York came to the throne as King James II in 1685, Oates was convicted of perjury, pilloried, flogged, and imprisoned. But when James was deposed in 1688, Oates was released and granted a pension. He became a Baptist in 1693 but was expelled from that church eight years later. He died in obscurity.
