Uchimura Kanzō,  (born May 2, 1861, Edo [now Tokyo], Japan—died  March 28, 1930, Tokyo), Japanese Christian who was an important formative influence on many writers and intellectual leaders of modern Japan.
Uchimura came from a samurai (warrior) family and studied (1878–81) at the Sapporo Agricultural School (now Hokkaido University), where he was converted to Christianity. After several years’ service in the government as a scientist, he continued his studies in the United States (1884–88), where he determined to spend his life propagating Christianity in Japan. Upon his return to Japan, Uchimura’s adherence to his beliefs brought him into conflict with most segments of society. In 1890 he became an instructor in a government school, but the following year he caused an uproar when he questioned the divinity of the emperor by refusing to bow when presented with the Imperial Rescript on Education. The resulting nationwide controversy over the loyalty of Christians led to his resignation of his post.
In 1900 Uchimura founded the magazine Seisho no kenkyū (“Biblical Studies”), which he continued to publish until his death in 1930. His best-known writings, however, are his three autobiographies: Kirisuto-shintō no nagusame (1893; “Consolations of a Christian”), Kyūanroku (1893; “Seeking Peace of Mind”), and How I Became A Christian (1895). He also wrote essays on Christianity and pacifism and lectured extensively in Japan on the Bible. Uchimura’s interpretation of Christianity emphasized the central importance of the Bible and the individual conscience and denied the need for a church or sacraments, a tradition still known in Japan by the word he coined for it, mukyōkai (“nonchurch movement”). His religious freethinking drew around him groups of young men, among them the writers Masamune Hakuchō, Mushanokōji Saneatsu, and Arishima Takeo, who in 1910 founded the influential Shirakaba (“White Birch”), a journal that served as a vehicle for their humanitarian ideals. Uchimura’s Complete Works were translated and published in seven volumes (1971–73).
