United Church of Christ,  Protestant denomination in the United States, formed by the union of the Evangelical and Reformed Church and the General Council of Congregational Christian Churches. Each was itself the result of a former union. Negotiations toward union of the two bodies were begun in 1942, and during the next 15 years there were seven revisions of the Basis of Union. The United Church of Christ was formed in a General Synod on June 25, 1957, and its constitution was declared in force on July 4, 1961.
A Statement of Faith for the new church was adopted by the two uniting groups in 1959 in Oberlin, Ohio. This statement is, however, considered by members to be a testimony to the faith of the uniting churches rather than a final rule of faith. The local churches are neither bound by nor required to accept it.
Church government is a combination of congregationalism and presbyterianism. The autonomy of each local church in the management of its own affairs is guaranteed by the constitution of the United Church of Christ. Local churches in an area are combined into an association, and several associations make up a conference (often those located within the same state). Associations and conferences hold annual meetings. The highest representative body of the United Church of Christ is the General Synod, which is composed of about 700 delegates chosen by the conferences. It meets biennially.
In 2005 the United Church of Christ became the first American mainline Christian denomination to support same-sex marriage when about 80 percent of delegates to the General Synod voted in favour of a resolution affirming the right to marriage regardless of gender. Although the decision was not binding on member churches, it prompted fears that dissenting congregations would leave the church. No action was taken on two resolutions reaffirming a “traditional” definition of marriage during the 2007 General Synod.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the church reported more than 1.2 million members and nearly 5,600 congregations. Headquarters are in Cleveland.
