Vairochana, (Sanskrit: “Illuminator”) also called Mahavairochana (“Great Illuminator”),  the supreme Buddha, as regarded by many Mahayana Buddhists of East Asia and of Tibet, Nepal, and Java.
Some Buddhists regard Vairochana, or Mahavairochana, as a being separate from the five “self-born” Dhyani-Buddhas, one of whom is known as Vairochana. Among the Shingon sect of Japan, he is the chief object of reverence and is regarded as the source of the entire universe. In Japanese he is called Dainichi Nyorai (“Great Sun Buddha”), or Roshana; in Chinese Piluzhena; in Tibetan Rnam-par-snang-mdzad, or Rnam-snang (“Maker of Brilliant Light”).
When represented as one of the “self-born” Buddhas, as he is in Nepali, Tibetan, and Javanese art, Vairochana occupies the chief position and is often considered to be the progenitor of the other four Dhyani-Buddhas, or the Adi-Buddha himself. In paintings, Vairochana is coloured white, and his hands are shown in the dharmachakramudra (“teaching gesture”). His consort is Vajradhatvishvari or Tara, his family Moha, his mount the dragon (or lion), his symbol the chakra (“wheel”), his skandha (“personality component”) rupa (“matter”), his syllable a or om, his element space, his sense perception hearing, his sense organ the ear, and his location in the human body the head.
In China and Japan, Vairochana is given reverence by Buddhists of the Yogachara school (which led to the foundation of the Shingon sect). Legend claims that he transmitted to a supernatural personage, Vajrasattva, the Yoga doctrine, which was in turn introduced into China in 719 ce by Vajrabodhi and into Japan by Kūkai (Kōbō Daishi; 774–835).
In Japan he is also worshiped in the form of the fierce Fudō Myō-ō (Chinese: Budong fo; Sanskrit: Acala), whose duty it is to combat evil and to take charge of the soul after death. Vairochana is frequently represented in Japanese painting and sculpture, most notably the 53-foot (16-metre) seated bronze Roshana in the Tōdai-ji, at Nara, which was installed in 752 but restored in later centuries. As the supreme Buddha, his characteristic gesture is the mudra of the six elements, in which the index finger of the left hand is clasped by the five fingers of the right, symbolizing the uniting of the five elements of the material world (earth, water, fire, air, and ether) with the spiritual (consciousness).
