Vaishnavism, also called Vishnuism,  one of the major forms of modern Hinduism, characterized by devotion to the god Vishnu and his incarnations (avatars). A devotee of Vishnu is called a Vaishnava. The devotional Vaishnava literature that emerged in Sanskrit and in vernacular writings from the 10th through the 16th century continues to be a part of Vaishnava worship, though it is often supplemented by later philosophical and narrative texts, both written and oral.
For Vaishnavas, absolute reality (brahman) is manifested in Vishnu, who in turn is incarnated in Rama, Krishna, and other avatars. Through his avatars, Vishnu defends traditional righteousness in keeping with the moral law (dharma). The most popular of the avatars are Rama and Krishna. Rama is often depicted in Hindu art and literature with his consort Sita. Krishna manifests his true identity as Vishnu to his warrior friend Arjuna in the Bhagavadgita, but he is often portrayed as a handsome youth in the company of Radha or other gopis (milkmaids).
The various sects of worshippers of Vishnu pray to him in different ways. For some, the goal of religious devotion (bhakti) to Vishnu is liberation (moksha) from the cycle of birth and death (samsara). For others, it is health and prosperity in this life, good crops, success in business, or thriving children. Most Vaishnavas hope to spend eternity in Vishnu’s presence after death.
Vaishnavism comprises many sects and groups that differ in their interpretation of the relationship between the individual and God. The Srivaishnava sect, for example, emphasizes the doctrine of vishishtadvaita (“qualified nondualism”) of Ramanuja, according to which, although the differentiated phenomenal world is illusory (maya), it is nevertheless the medium through which devotees may gain access to God. Another group professes the dvaita (“dualism”) of the philosopher Madhva, the belief that God and the soul are separate entities and that the soul’s existence is dependent on God. The Pushtimarg sect maintains the shuddhadvaita (“pure nondualism”) doctrine of the theologian Vallabhacharya, which does not declare the phenomenal world to be an illusion. The Gaudiya sect, founded by Chaitanya, teaches achintya-bhedabheda (“inconceivable duality and nonduality”), the belief that the relation between God and the world is beyond the scope of human comprehension. In addition to these philosophical sects, many other Vaishnava groups are scattered throughout India, often centred in local temples or shrines.
