Walter Rauschenbusch,  (born Oct. 4, 1861, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.—died  July 25, 1918, Rochester), clergyman and theology professor who led the Social Gospel movement in the United States.
The son of a Lutheran missionary to German immigrants in the United States, Rauschenbusch graduated from the Rochester Free Academy and then studied for four years in Germany, returning in 1883 to simultaneously finish at the University of Rochester and begin seminary training. On June 1, 1886, he was ordained a minister of the Second German Baptist Church in New York City, where he became aware of social problems from the personal distress he encountered in a depressed neighbourhood and from the mayoral campaign based on a social-welfare platform by the economist Henry George. Even more influential were two young Baptist preachers, Leighton Williams and Nathaniel Schmidt. With Rauschenbusch they formed a Society of Jesus, later expanded into the Brotherhood of the Kingdom. For the Right, a monthly periodical “in the interests of the working people,” was launched in November 1889 in an effort to reach the labouring classes and to aid in the formulation of a Christian socialist program. Publication ceased in March 1891 when Rauschenbusch left for a year of study in Germany and a visit to England, where he became interested in Fabian socialism. In 1897 he joined the faculty of Rochester Theological Seminary and in 1902 became professor of church history.
Upon the publication of Christianity and the Social Crisis (1907), Rauschenbusch gained recognition as the major spokesman of the Social Gospel movement in the United States. Considered both dynamic and compassionate, he always regarded himself as an evangelist seeking to win men to a “new birth” in Christ. At the same time, he believed that the Kingdom of God required social as well as individual salvation, and he demanded “a new order that would rest on the Christian principles of equal rights and democratic distribution of economic power.” Among Rauschenbusch’s other writings are Prayers of the Social Awakening (1910), Christianizing the Social Order (1912), and A Theology for the Social Gospel (1917).
