Yves Congar, in full Yves-Marie-Joseph Cardinal Congar,  (born April 13, 1904, Sedan, France—died June 22, 1995, Paris), French Dominican priest who was widely recognized in his lifetime as one of the most important Roman Catholic theologians of the 20th century. Best known for his work in ecclesiology (theology of the church itself as an institution or community), Congar drew from biblical, patristic, and medieval sources to revitalize the discipline. An early advocate of ecumenism, he was a major influence at the Second Vatican Council (1962–65).
Born and raised in the French Ardennes, Congar was 10 years old when Germany invaded at the outset of World War I in 1914. The experience of siege and hunger and the deportation of his father marked him profoundly. At age 14, he felt a call to preach in order to convert humanity from such misery. He studied at the minor seminary at Reims from 1919 to 1921 and continued his training at the seminary at the Catholic University of Paris from 1921 to 1924. After a year of obligatory military service, he joined the French Dominicans in 1925 and was ordained a priest on July 25, 1930. He lived and worked at the Saulchoir, the famous Dominican house of studies that had been relocated from France to Belgium in 1903 and then returned to France in 1937. There he studied the work of the Dominican theologian Thomas Aquinas (1224/25–75), who would have a lasting influence on Congar’s theology. Pope Leo XIII’s encyclical Aeterni patris (1879) had made Aquinas normative for Roman Catholic theology, but Congar learned to approach Aquinas not simply as a source of Catholic teaching but as a theologian responsive to his own historical context. Congar was also influenced by the work of the Saulchoir Dominicans Ambrose Gardeil (1859–1931) and Marie-Dominique Chenu (1895–1990), by the writings of the German theologian Johann Adam Möhler (1796–1838), and by the ecumenical contacts he forged with Protestant and Eastern Orthodox theologians.
In 1932 Congar began his teaching career at the Saulchoir with a course on ecclesiology. A later series of lectures given at a meeting for Christian unity in Paris formed the basis of his first book, Chrétiens désunis: principes d’un “oecuménisme” catholique (1937; Divided Christendom: A Catholic Study of the Problem of Reunion), and this engagement with ecumenism raised suspicions with the Vatican. In 1937 Congar founded Unam Sanctam, a series of books intended to revive forgotten themes in Catholic ecclesiology. In addition to editing Unam Sanctam, which eventually ran to 77 volumes, Congar wrote prodigiously for a wide variety of scholarly and popular journals and published numerous books. (The bibliographies of his writings compiled by Pietro Quattrocchi and Aidan Nichols include nearly 1,800 entries.)
At the onset of World War II, Congar was called up as a reservist by the French army. Captured by the Germans in 1940, he was held for five years in German prison camps, including Colditz and Lübeck. After the war, the Vatican’s suspicion of his work intensified. From 1947 to 1956 Congar’s writing was subject to censorship, and he was refused permission to publish translations or new editions of several of his books. In 1954 he was forbidden to teach and was forced to leave France. The immediate cause of this exile was an article he published on the worker-priests, a group of Dominicans in solidarity with the working class. He was first assigned to the École Biblique in Jerusalem, later called to Rome, and then sent to Dominican institutions in Cambridge, Eng., and Strasbourg, France. Despite these difficulties, Congar published several influential books in the postwar period, including Vraie et fausse réforme dans l’église (1950; “True and False Reform in the Church”), Jalons pour une théologie laïcat (1953; Lay People in the Church), La Tradition et les traditions (1960–63; Tradition and Traditions), Neuf cent ans après: notes sur le “Schisme oriental” (1954; After Nine Hundred Years: The Background of the Schism Between the Eastern and Western Churches), and Esquisses du mystère de l’église (1941; The Mystery of the Church).
In 1960 Congar’s exile ended when Pope John XXIII invited him to serve on the preparatory theological commission of the Second Vatican Council, commonly called Vatican II. As the council progressed, Congar made important contributions to many documents. After the council he continued to lecture and write with the conviction that Vatican II was not an end in itself but the beginning of the church to come. During this period his work focused increasingly on the theology of the Holy Spirit.
Congar suffered from a form of sclerosis that had been identified in 1935, and, as he aged, it increasingly constrained his mobility. By 1984 the disease had progressed to such an extent that Congar decided to enter the Hôpital des Invalides in Paris, where he continued to work despite his painful condition. In 1994 his lifelong dedication and contribution to the church was formally recognized by his appointment to the College of Cardinals by Pope John Paul II.
As a young Dominican at the Saulchoir, Congar determined that the mission of the church was impeded by what he and Chenu termed “baroque theology.” This theology, which had dominated Catholic ecclesiology since the Protestant Reformation, limited theology to a deductive logical exercise, emphasized submission to authority, and conceived the church in strictly juridical and hierarchical terms. In response, Congar aspired to develop an ecclesiology that would help make visible what he termed the “truly living face” of the church. His work of renewal had two primary pillars: ecumenical outreach and historical research. Congar participated in ecumenical initiatives when it was still unpopular among Roman Catholics to do so, and his teaching and scholarship reflected his conviction that the renewal of the church required a study of history that would recover lost or neglected dimensions of ecclesiology.
Congar’s work emphasized that the church is the mystical body of Christ, the people of God, and the sacrament of salvation. From this foundation, he revitalized many dimensions of ecclesiology, including the theology of ecclesial unity and catholicity. He reinvigorated the theology of ministry, gave laity a new sense of their importance in the life of the church, and engendered in the entire church a renewed sense of its mission to the world. He also made important contributions to the theology of tradition and to ecumenical dialogue.
