Karmah, also spelled Kerma,  archaeological site, northern Sudan. It is located near the town of Karmah al-Nuzul, about 30 miles (50 km) north of Dunqulah (Dongola) on the right bank of the Nile above its Third Cataract. An American expedition from Harvard University carried out extensive archaeological excavations there from 1913 to 1915. Swiss excavations of the 1970s and 1980s have greatly increased knowledge of the site.
An indigenous Nilotic culture, long misidentified as an Egyptian outpost, flourished in the rich agricultural region that surrounds the site. Gold from the eastern desert, cattle pastoralism, and trade along the Nile were other sources of wealth. Possibly the land of Yam mentioned by Harkhuf of the 6th dynasty lay here, as calcite vases with the names of 6th-dynasty pharaohs excavated at Karmah might suggest, but the first historical reference was made by Sesostris I (1918–1875 bc), who called the area Cush. Sesostris III encountered the Cushites when he invaded Sai Island in about 1826 bc, but he withdrew and established the Egyptian frontier at Semna. Erecting a series of forts in the Second Cataract area, he forbade the Cushites to pass north of Semna except to trade at Iken (Mirgissa).
During the weakening 13th dynasty (c. 1756–c. 1630 bc) the Karmah princes overran the fortresses of Wawat and about 1630 bc raided Egypt itself. It was from these contacts that the rich Middle Kingdom artifacts found at Karmah in the rulers’ tumulus tombs stemmed. Karmah took over the Egyptian fortress at Buhen, where some expatriate Egyptians served as mercenaries and left memorials. The Hyksos maintained contact with Karmah, and, after Kamose, the 17th-dynasty Theban ruler, attacked them, Auserre Apopi I, the Hyksos king, sought an alliance with Karmah. Kamose, however, intercepted the messenger, thwarting the plan.
As they repelled the Hyksos, the Thebans also penetrated Nubia; the warlike Medjay desert tribesmen gave valued service in the war of liberation. Thutmose I (1493–c. 1482 bc) mounted a major offensive, capturing Karmah and destroying the Cushite state.
The Karmah rulers were buried in large multicompartment tumulus tombs, resting on beds, surrounded by hundreds of their sacrificed courtiers. Their pottery included a highly polished, very hard, black-top red ware. Some Hyksos pottery, seals, and scarabs were found in the richest graves. Rich inlays with Egyptian motifs found in the tombs were made in the industrial building excavated on the town site. Egyptians may have been among the craftsmen employed there. The richest tombs contained Middle Kingdom Egyptian artifacts.
