Tianjin, Wade-Giles romanization T’ien-ching, conventional Tientsin,  city and province-level shi (municipality), northern China. It is located to the east of Hebei province, at the northeastern extremity of the North China Plain. After Shanghai and Beijing, it is the third largest municipality of China. It is also the most important manufacturing centre and the leading port of North China.
Central Tianjin (the municipality’s urban core) lies about 75 miles (120 km) southeast of central Beijing and about 35 miles inland from the Bo Hai (Gulf of Chihli), a shallow inlet of the Yellow Sea. Tianjin municipality, like Beijing and Shanghai, is under direct control of the State Council.
Tianjin (meaning literally “Heavenly Ford”) has been an important transport and trading centre since the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1206–1368). It was famous as a cosmopolitan centre long before the arrival of the European trading community in the 19th century. Its maritime orientation and its role as the commercial gateway to Beijing fostered the growth of an ethnically diverse and commercially innovative population. The city is noted for its woven handicraft products, terra-cotta figurines, hand-painted woodblock prints, and extensive seafood cuisine. Area Tianjin municipality, 4,540 square miles (11,760 square km). Pop. (2002 est.) city, 4,993,106; (2010 prelim.) Tianjin municipality, 12,938,224.
Central Tianjin is located where the Ziya and Yongding rivers and the north and south sections of the Grand Canal (Bei [North] Yunhe and Nan [South] Yunhe, respectively) meet before merging into the  Hai River, which then flows eastward to the Bo Hai. The city stands at an elevation less than 15 feet (5 metres) above sea level on a flat alluvial plain. Some low-lying areas east of the city are only about 6 feet above sea level, and the majority of the built-up area is below 12 feet.
The municipality borders on the Bo Hai to the east, Beijing municipality to the northwest, and Hebei province to the north, west, and south. Between 1958 and 1967 Tianjin was a subprovince-level city, which served as the capital of Hebei province. Its jurisdiction extended over the built-up urban core and eastward along the Hai River to include the port at Tanggu. At that time, Tianjin city was administratively separate from the Tianjin Special District, which had its seat at Yangliuqing, southwest of central Tianjin.
In 1967 Tianjin municipality was made a first-order, province-level administrative unit, and the area under its immediate control was expanded to include counties (xian) formerly under the special district. The city simultaneously became the special district seat but lost its position as provincial capital. In the middle 2000s Tianjin municipality was composed of 15 urban and suburban districts (qu) and 3 rural counties. The municipality was under direct jurisdiction of the central government in Beijing.
Despite Tianjin’s proximity to the sea, it has a distinctly continental climate with sharp daily and seasonal temperature fluctuations. It is subject to the full effects of the cool, dry Siberian high-pressure system during the winter (October to April), while in the summer (May to September) the high pressure system over the North Pacific Ocean brings hot and rainy weather. Winter precipitation is minimal, and the air is dry, with relative humidity averaging 50 percent. In summer, moist rain-bearing southerly winds prevail, and the average relative humidity exceeds 70 percent. The average annual temperature is 56 °F (13 °C), with a January average of 25 °F (−4 °C) and a July average of 81 °F (27 °C). Severe winter storms are common, but typhoons seldom occur.
The Hai River was long subject to frequent flooding. As the main outlet for the rivers of the North China Plain, it frequently became heavily silted during the spring and summer months; during the winter season its water level was often too low for navigation. Extensive water conservation began in 1897. The river was straightened to facilitate tidal action and to shorten the distance to the sea. Locks were constructed to regulate the flow of water from the river into its many canals, the river and the sand bars at its mouth were dredged, and silt-laden water was diverted into settling basins.
Since 1949 multipurpose flood-control, irrigation, and navigation improvements have been made. Construction of the Guanting Reservoir on the Yongding River near Beijing has helped alleviate flood damage within metropolitan Tianjin. New diversion channels have also been built to control the floodwaters of the Daqing and Ziya rivers to the southwest.
The marshy lakes and floodplains around Tianjin abound with numerous varieties of reeds, bulrushes, and shrubs, such as tamarisk. Closer to the seashore, Russian thistle, glasswort, and artemisia can be found. Freshwater fish (including silver and golden carp) are raised in ponds and marshy depressions.
