Toronto,  city, capital of the province of Ontario, southeastern Canada. It is the most populous city in Canada, a multicultural city, and the country’s financial and commercial centre. Its location on the northwestern shore of Lake Ontario, which forms part of the border between Canada and the United States, and its access to Atlantic shipping via the St. Lawrence Seaway and to major U.S. industrial centres via the Great Lakes have enabled Toronto to become an important international trading centre. Moreover, the city is positioned on the edge of some of the best farmland in Canada, with a climate favourable to growing a wide range of crops, thereby making Toronto a transportation, distribution, and manufacturing centre. Most importantly, its central location, along with a host of political policies favouring international trade, places this city with the greatest economic ties to, and influence from, the United States. Since the second half of the 20th century the city has grown phenomenally, from a rather sedate provincial town—“Toronto the Good”—to a lively, thriving, cosmopolitan metropolitan area. Area 244 square miles (632 square km); metro. area, 2,280 square miles (5,905 square km). Pop. (2011) 2,615,060; metro. area, 5,583,064; (2016) 2,731,571; metro. area, 5,928,040.
The melting of ice from the past glacial age altered the Toronto region’s landscape profoundly. Approximately 11,000 years ago a body of water much larger (about 130 feet [40 metres] higher) than the present-day Lake Ontario was in existence there—a glacial lake referred to as Lake Iroquois. With the opening up of the St. Lawrence River, the lake waters receded, dropping in excess of 300 feet (90 metres) below the present level. Over time, the water levels rose to the present condition, leaving a marshy shoreline but a fine natural harbour. The site of the city is almost uniformly flat, although 3 to 4 miles (5 to 6 km) inland there is a fairly sharp rise of some 40 feet (12 metres)—the shoreline elevation of the former glacial lake.
The resources of the surrounding land were also important to Toronto’s development. The rich sedimentary soils of southern Ontario provided excellent farmland, and the ancient rock of the Canadian Shield to the north not only was a source of valuable mineral wealth but also was endowed with forests of spruce and pine. Another physical feature is Toronto’s location at the mouth of the Humber River, a river that facilitated a trade route north to Lake Simcoe and a shortcut to Georgian Bay on Lake Huron.
Toronto has a continental climate that is modified considerably by the proximity of the Great Lakes. Average temperature for January is in the low to mid-20s F (about –4.2 °C), but the wind chill factor can decrease this temperature considerably. In summer, the average July temperature is in the low 70s F (about 22.2 °C); however, it is not unusual to have summer days where the temperature exceeds 90 °F (32 °C) and the humidity is 100 percent. The prevailing westerly winds and the Great Lakes also influence precipitation, which is relatively even year-round, amounting to about 33 inches (834 mm) annually. In winter, though, this precipitation is in the form of snow and totals in excess of 4 feet (131 cm). Latitude plays a role in Toronto’s relatively mild climate (as well as that of the farming region of southern Ontario); at 43°40′ N (with much of the farmland to the south of this latitude), Toronto is located only slightly north of California’s northern boundary (42° N). However, this location can subject the city to hurricanes—such as Hurricane Hazel in 1954, which caused approximately one billion Canadian dollars (in today’s terms) in damage and took 81 lives.
A major increase in the population of Toronto (nearly fourfold expansion, from 1.3 million in 1951 to over 5 million by 2006) and national economic growth influenced the city skyline, which is dominated by the CN Tower (a communications and observation spire 1,815 feet [553 metres] high) as well as by the First Canadian Place (Bank of Montreal), Scotia Plaza, Canada Trust Tower, Manulife Centre, Commerce Court, Toronto-Dominion Centre, and Bay Adelaide Centre, each of which is more than 50 stories high. Other prominent buildings include City Hall (1965), Eaton Centre (a large indoor shopping complex), the gilded Royal Bank Plaza, the Toronto Reference Library, the Ontario Science Centre, the Royal Ontario Museum, with its crystal-shaped facade, and Roy Thomson Hall, noted for its excellent acoustics. The city also features an extensive system of underground tunnels and concourses lined with shops, restaurants, and theatres. Through the construction of new housing and mixed-use projects, together with the restoration and rehabilitation of heritage buildings, an extraordinary vitality has been brought to the urban core.
The city’s lakefront is separated from the downtown area by railway tracks and the Gardiner Expressway. However, there are many points of access to the waterfront, which is almost entirely public space and includes Sunnyside Pool, Balmy Beach Park, and the Waterfront Bike Trail. East of downtown, surrounding Kew Gardens, the area known as the Beach (or the Beaches) appears more like a resort town than a neighbourhood in a big city. In the Harbourfront neighbourhood, ferry service connects the dock area to the Toronto Islands, about half a mile (four-fifths of a kilometre) offshore, which have yacht clubs, an airport, recreational facilities, and a residential community.
Toronto is a city with scores of neighbourhoods, some of which have identities that have been imposed upon them by realtors, whereas others are of much longer standing and have a more distinctive character.  West of the central business district, following Queen Street W, is West Queen West, once a trendy bohemian section, now a more mainstream shopping district. Northeast of this area are two of Toronto’s best-known neighbourhoods, Chinatown and Kensington Market, the latter of which features an eclectic mix of shops and restaurants that reflect the city’s multicultural diversity. Still farther north, beyond the campus of the University of Toronto, is the Annex, a residential area that is home to many students and is the site of a number of attractive 19th-century homes. North of the Annex, on a hill overlooking Davenport Road is Casa Loma, the turreted castlelike mansion built in 1911–14 for $3.5 million (Canadian) by Sir Henry Pellatt. East of the Annex is the fashionable Yorkville-Cumberland boutique shopping area, to the south of which are Queen’s Park and the Ontario parliament building. Large expanses of grass and tall shade trees make this a pleasant area, complementing the ravines that form so important an element in the metropolitan parks system.
To the northeast of Queen’s Park is Rosedale, one of the most attractive residential areas in Toronto. It is an older neighbourhood of dignified houses and winding tree-lined streets quite close to the downtown centre, which itself contains many attractive streets of modest well-designed houses. South of Rosedale and bounded on the north by St. James Cemetery and on the east by the Don River is Cabbagetown, which takes its name from the cabbages that were once grown on lawns in this neighbourhood that is now the site of many beautifully restored vintage residences. Farther south, abutting the Gardiner Expressway, is the Distillery District, where brick-paved pedestrian walkways wind through architecturally significant Victorian-era industrial buildings that house restaurants, shops, and theatres. Immediately to the west, at the core of Old Town Toronto, is the St. Lawrence Market neighbourhood, a district of red and yellow brick Georgian structures centred on the historic market building (founded 1803) that gives the area its name.
Toronto’s growth and demographic makeup were influenced by many political and economic events that affected the whole province of Ontario. After the American Revolution, Ontario was referred to as a loyalist creation because of the influx  of English-speaking Protestants (and a number of First Nations) that chose to live in British North America. Immigration continued, slowly to begin with but then much more rapidly through transportation improvements that placed Toronto as a key transportation and industrial centre. Many of the immigrants were from across Europe as well as the United States. Still the population remained largely English-speaking and Protestant.
Following World War II, Toronto was a magnet for thousands of new immigrants, many coming from Europe during the 1950s and ’60s. Immigration laws had become more flexible by the 1970s, thus opening the door to a flood of new arrivals, particularly South Asians and Chinese. By the time of the 2006 census more than half of the Toronto metropolitan area was made up of “visible” minorities, making Toronto a truly cosmopolitan city.
