Amyloidosis,  disease characterized by the deposition of an abnormal protein called amyloid in the connective tissues and organs of the body that inhibits normal functioning. Amyloid is a fibrous, insoluble protein-carbohydrate complex that forms when normally soluble proteins such as antibodies become misfolded and adopt a fibril structure. There are different types of amyloid, and each type can be distinguished by the major protein component that it contains.
Amyloidosis may be systemic (affecting tissues and organs throughout the body), or it may be localized in tumourlike masses within certain organs. The organs most commonly affected by the disease include the kidneys, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and skin. Symptoms vary depending on which organ or organs are affected. For example, symptoms of intestinal bleeding, malnutrition, constipation, and diarrhea may be associated with amyloid deposits in the gastrointestinal tract, whereas symptoms of shortness of breath and heart failure may be associated with amyloid deposits in the heart.
There are different types of amyloidosis, which can be classified as primary, secondary, or hereditary. Primary systemic amyloidosis is rare and occurs in the absence of underlying disease. Symptoms typically appear in the fifth or sixth decade of life and may include skin abnormalities (e.g., discoloration and nodule formation), heart failure, kidney failure, and enlargement of the spleen and liver. Though the cause of this form is unknown, it is associated with the abnormal production of antibodies in the bone marrow. These antibodies cannot be broken down, and, as a result, they enter the bloodstream and are eventually deposited in other tissues in the form of amyloid proteins.
In contrast to primary amyloidosis, secondary amyloidosis occurs in association with a chronic disease such as tuberculosis, syphilis, rheumatoid arthritis, leprosy, or Hodgkin disease. Secondary amyloidosis often affects the kidneys, liver, and spleen. A particular form of amyloidosis characterized by the deposition of amyloid in the brain is associated with Alzheimer disease.
Hereditary amyloidosis arises when a genetic mutation that causes the formation of amyloid proteins is inherited. There are multiple forms of hereditary amyloidosis. One of the most common forms is known as familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP), which is caused by mutations in a gene designated TTR (transthyretin). Transthyretin protein, produced by the TTR gene, normally circulates in the blood and plays an important role in the transport and tissue delivery of thyroid hormone and retinol. FAP primarily affects the nervous system, resulting in abnormal nerve sensation, pain, and limb weakness. In some cases, amyloid deposits may occur in the heart or kidneys.
Amyloidosis is diagnosed through the detection of amyloid proteins in the blood or urine, as well as through tissue biopsy and imaging studies to locate amyloid deposits within organs. Treatment is directed toward reducing symptoms. Agents commonly prescribed for primary amyloidosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, such as prednisone and colchicine, and some patients may be treated with the chemotherapeutic agent melphalan. In localized forms of the disease, treatment may involve surgical removal of amyloidic masses. In secondary amyloidosis, treatment is aimed at controlling organ damage inflicted by underlying disease. Patients with advanced amyloidosis may require dialysis or liver, heart, or kidney transplant.
