Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS),  rare genetic disorder in which a genetically male individual fails to respond naturally to the effects of male hormones (also known as androgens). Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is an X-chromosome-linked recessive disorder, being caused by a mutation that is inherited on a single X chromosome. Inherited androgen resistance results in diminished virilization of the male external genitalia.
The degree to which the male external genitalia are feminized depends on the functionality of the androgen receptor. Deletion of the receptor gene results in complete AIS (CAIS), in which the individual’s external genitalia appear female. Reduction in androgen receptor functionality results in partial AIS (PAIS). PAIS is graded on the extent of feminization of external genitalia, which can be ambiguous at birth. Most individuals with AIS are infertile but are otherwise healthy. Treatment includes extended psychological support and hormone therapy.
Between the 8th and 10th week of gestation, male gonads begin producing testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, and Müllerian inhibiting factor, which are hormones critical to male development. In AIS, normal amounts of the hormones are produced, but properly functioning androgen receptors for testosterone and dihydrotestosterone are absent. In addition, exposure to Müllerian inhibiting factor causes internal male development, while unopposed testicular estrogen results in the development of external female genitalia.
Individuals with AIS lack internal female reproductive organs and do not menstruate, though the conversion of testosterone to estradiol enhances breast development. Only individuals with the mildest forms of PAIS are fertile. Most individuals have sparse armpit and pubic hair.
In CAIS, individuals have labia, a clitoris, and, at most, the distal two thirds of the vagina, though sometimes only a dimple is present. Because individuals with CAIS look female, they are rarely diagnosed in childhood unless a mass in the lower abdomen or groin is felt and imaging or surgery reveals an undescended testis. More often, CAIS individuals present to a physician during puberty when they fail to menstruate.
In PAIS, there may be undescended testes, a small penis, placement of the urethal opening on the underside of the penis, an enlarged clitoris, or fused labia. Owing to ambiguity, PAIS is often diagnosed in childhood. Otherwise, individuals will present to a clinician during puberty. If male identified, individuals often are concerned about breast development, whereas female-identified patients often are concerned about the lack of menstruation.
Diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of a Y chromosome, male levels of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, and, on imaging, intra-abdominal testes or an absent uterus. In addition to long-term counseling for individuals and families, support groups play a significant role in treatment. Gender-appropriate hormone therapy is usually started at puberty. Eventually, testes are surgically removed to prevent intra-abdominal testicular cancer that could be missed on physical examination.
Optional cosmetic treatments include nonsurgical lengthening of the vagina, vaginal construction, or clitoral reduction. Breast reduction and repositioning of the urethral opening are surgical options in male-identifying AIS patients.
