anemia, also spelled anaemia,  condition in which the red blood cells (erythrocytes) are reduced in number or volume or are deficient in hemoglobin, their oxygen-carrying pigment. The most noticeable outward symptom of anemia is usually pallor of the skin, mucous membranes, and nail beds. Symptoms of tissue oxygen deficiency include pulsating noises in the ear, dizziness, fainting, and shortness of breath. Compensatory action of the heart may lead to its enlargement and to a rapid pulse rate. There are close to 100 different varieties of anemia, distinguished by the cause and by the size and hemoglobin content of the abnormal cells.
Anemia results when the destruction of red blood cells exceeds production, production of red blood cells is reduced, or acute or chronic blood loss occurs. Increased destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis) may be caused by hereditary cell defects, as in sickle cell anemia, hereditary spherocytosis, or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Destruction also may be caused by exposure to hemolytic chemicals (substances causing the release of hemoglobin from the red cells) such as the antibiotic drug sulfanilamide, the antimalarial drug primaquine, or naphthalene (mothballs), or it may be caused by development of antibodies against the red blood cells, as in erythroblastosis fetalis. Reduced production of red cells may be caused by disorders of the bone marrow, as in leukemia and aplastic anemia, or by deficiency of one or more of the nutrients, notably vitamin B12, folic acid (folate), and iron, that are necessary for the synthesis of red cells. Lower production may also be caused by deficiency of certain hormones or inhibition of the red-cell-forming processes by certain drugs or by toxins produced by disease, particularly chronic infection, cancer, and kidney failure.
Structurally, the anemias generally fall into the following types: (1) macrocytic anemia, characterized by larger-than-normal red cells (e.g., pernicious anemia), (2) normocytic anemia, characterized by a decrease in the number of red cells, which are otherwise relatively normal (e.g., anemia caused by sudden blood loss, as in a bleeding peptic ulcer, most cases of hemophilia, and purpura), (3) simple microcytic anemia, characterized by smaller-than-normal red cells (encountered in cases of chronic inflammatory conditions and in renal disease), and (4) microcytic hypochromic anemia, characterized by a reduction in red-cell size and hemoglobin concentration (frequently associated with iron-deficiency anemia but also seen in thalassemia).
The treatment of anemia varies greatly, depending on the diagnosis. It includes supplying the missing nutrients in the deficiency anemias, detecting and removing toxic factors, improving the underlying disorder with drugs and other forms of therapy, decreasing the extent of blood destruction by methods that include surgery (e.g., splenectomy), or restoring blood volume with transfusion.
