Antisocial personality disorder,  personality disorder characterized by a pervasive pattern of disregard for the feelings of others and often accompanied by violation of the rights of others through negligence or overt action. The disorder occurs in about 2 to 3 percent of adults; prevalence is significantly higher in prison populations. In the past, antisocial personality disorder often was considered to be a psychopathic or sociopathic condition. Those characterizations, however, were misleading, because they frequently were used to describe extreme and violent forms of the disorder (e.g., serial killing).
Behaviours linked to the development of antisocial personality disorder usually appear in childhood; examples include animal cruelty and an inclination toward setting fires. Affected individuals tend to be impulsive and to have problems with the law at an early age. Many children who display these behaviours are diagnosed with conduct disorder. In adults a lack of empathy, a lack of remorse, irritability, and an inability to engage in close relationships may be pronounced, along with continued rule breaking. Individuals also may display odd behaviours and experience distorted and paranoid thinking.
Those who are affected by antisocial personality disorder have great difficulty conforming to social norms and rules, making it very difficult for them to maintain employment and function within a family. Many individuals with the disorder also engage in high-risk novelty-seeking behaviour, often associated with substance use. Because of these behaviours, they are much more likely to die prematurely or to experience disability associated with vehicular accidents and homicide or suicide attempts.
Antisocial personality disorder is difficult to treat, since patients typically do not feel guilt or experience authentic remorse for their actions. Cognitive behavioral therapy and substance-abuse programs in conjunction with incarceration have been found to be effective in some cases. Antisocial personality disorder sometimes improves on its own as the individual ages.
