Chemical dependency,   the body’s physical and/or psychological addiction to a psychoactive (mind-altering) substance, such as narcotics, alcohol, or nicotine. Physical dependency on such chemicals as prescription drugs or alcohol stems from repetitive use followed by the gradual increase in the body’s tolerance to, or ability to assimilate, that drug. Thus, increasingly larger doses must be consumed to maintain the drug’s desired effects, which may include the temporary alleviation of depression or anxiety, or the induction of euphoria. Without an increase in the dosage, it is possible for actual or anticipated drug withdrawal symptoms to occur.
The two most common forms of chemical dependency are alcoholism and addiction to nonnarcotic central-nervous-system drugs. The latter include short- and intermediate-acting barbiturates such as secobarbital, pentobarbital, and amabarbital, tranquillizers such as chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, meprobamate and methaqualone, and amphetamines such as methamphetamine and dextroamphetamine. Characteristics of dependency on these drugs include a strong desire or need to continue taking the drug, a periodic tendency to increase the dosage, and a psychic and physical need to rely on the drug’s effects for the maintenance of homeostasis (physical balance). Individuals who develop a dependency for one drug may also consume other types of mind-altering drugs to affect feelings and perceptions. Polydrug users may swing between ingesting barbiturates (“downers”) and amphetamines (“uppers”).
Excess of both barbiturates and alcohol may result in a form of intoxication with the similar symptoms of impaired mental and psychomotor skills. Taken together, barbiturates and alcohol, potentiate each other; that is, the effects of the two drugs taken together is greater than the sum of their effects when taken separately.
Sudden drug withdrawal can lead to symptoms associated with delirium tremens, such as rapid pulse, elevated blood pressure, profuse sweating, paranoid delusions, and hallucinations. Treatment for chemical dependency, known as detoxification, should only be conducted under close medical supervision, usually in a hospital.
Detoxification programs may be either self-contained or part of broader psychiatric-treatment programs and normally involve both medical and psychological personnel. Individual and group psychotherapy are critical elements in aiding the patient to adjust to the physical symptoms of withdrawal and the pressures which underlay the addiction. Support groups, mainly Alcoholics Anonymous, have been very successful in treating alcoholics. It is generally agreed, however, that a person with a vulnerability to a certain kind of chemical substance abuse can never be totally cured in a medical sense; he must remain vigilant and committed to avoiding similar problems in the future. In fact, the ability to admit addiction and the will to change are necessary first steps to any successful detoxification program.
The individual dependent on opiate drugs such as heroin or morphine may be permanently dependent. In 1967, two Americans, internist Vincent P. Dole and psychiatrist Marie E. Nyswander, suggested that a chronic chemical dependency on opiates “induces a physiologic change at the cellular level that is permanent and not reversed by withdrawal of these agents.” Opiate-addicted individuals are often treated by maintaining them with the synthetic narcotic methadone in a manner comparable to the way that a diabetic needs insulin to correct a physiologic deficiency.
