cleft lip,  relatively common congenital deformity in which the central to medial upper lip fails to fuse properly during the second month of prenatal life, resulting in a fissure in the lip beneath the nostril. Once colloquially known as harelip, cleft lip may be unilateral or bilateral. It may take the form of anything from a small pit to a complete fissure extending the entire vertical length of the lip into the nostril, and it may occur alone or in conjunction with cleft palate (a fissure in the roof of the mouth). Most cleft lips exhibit an associated deformity of the nose, wherein the cartilage and other tissues of the nose are malformed. Many cleft lips are also associated with a cleft of the gum (alveolus), which can range from a small notch of the gum to a complete separation of all tissues, including the bone.
Cleft lip is sometimes familial, and it is a frequent finding in certain congenital disorders. Risk for cleft lip may be influenced by race, being particularly common among Asians. The development of cleft lip may also be associated with exposure to environmental factors during pregnancy, including smoking, alcohol consumption, drug use, nutritional deficiencies (e.g., folate deficiency), certain medications (e.g., seizure medications), and viral infections.
Babies born with a cleft lip but with a normal palate generally are able to feed without significant difficulty. Dental abnormalities are common, characterized by malaligned teeth or fewer than normal teeth. Some individuals with unrepaired or poorly repaired clefts of the lip also experience psychological difficulties, which may be aggravated by teasing and ostracization. Self-esteem may be affected negatively and result in the child’s withdrawal from social activities. The psychological problems incurred by children with unrepaired or improperly repaired clefts can be serious and debilitating.
Cleft lip may be diagnosed before birth through ultrasound and is readily apparent at birth. Surgery to correct the condition usually is performed at about three months of age, although it may be performed slightly earlier or later. Surgery consists of freeing the tissues in the cleft margins and then suturing together the tissue layers (e.g., skin, muscle). Some surgeons also treat deformities of the nose at the time of the cleft-lip repair. Children with cleft lip often require specialized dental care and psychological intervention.
