Common cold,  acute viral infection that starts in the upper respiratory tract, sometimes spreads to the lower respiratory structures, and may cause secondary infections in the eyes or middle ears. More than 200 agents can cause symptoms of the common cold, including parainfluenza, influenza, respiratory syncytial viruses, and reoviruses. Rhinoviruses, however, are the most frequent cause, and some 100 different strains of rhinoviruses have been associated with coldlike illness in humans.
The popular term common cold reflects the feeling of chilliness on exposure to a cold environment that is part of the onset of symptoms. The cold is caught from exposure to infected people. People can carry the virus and communicate it without experiencing any of the symptoms themselves. Incubation is short—usually one to four days. The viruses start spreading from an infected person before the symptoms appear, and the spread reaches its peak during the symptomatic phase. The incidence of colds peaks during the autumn, and minor epidemics commonly occur throughout the winter. The reason for this incidence is unknown; it may result from the greater amount of time spent indoors, which increases the likelihood of close contact with those persons carrying cold viruses. Young children can contract between three and eight colds a year; they usually come into contact with the infectious agents in day-care centres or preschools.
Cold symptoms vary from person to person, but in the individual the same symptoms tend to recur in succeeding bouts of infection. Symptoms may include sneezing, headaches, fatigue, chills, sore throat, inflammation of the nose (rhinitis), and nasal discharge. There is usually no fever. The nasal discharge is the first warning that one has caught a cold. Once a virus becomes established on the respiratory surface of the nose, its activities irritate the nose’s cells, which respond by pouring out streams of clear fluid. This fluid acts to dilute the virus and clear it from the nose. The sensory organs in the nose are stung by the inflammatory reaction, thereby setting up sneezing, a second method of expelling the virus. If the virus penetrates more deeply into the upper respiratory tract, coughing is added to the infected person’s symptoms in a further effort to get rid of the virus. Coughing can be dry or produce amounts of mucus. Symptoms abate as the host’s defenses increase, the clear fluid often changing to a thick, yellow-green fluid that is full of the debris of dead cells. The usual duration of the illness is about five to seven days, but lingering cough and postnasal discharge may persist for two weeks or more.
Diagnosis of a cold is usually made by medical history alone, although it is possible to take a culture for viruses. There is no effective antiviral agent available for the common cold. Therapy consists of treating the symptoms—relieving aches, fever, and nasal congestion. One of the greatest medical controversies in the past few decades concerned the efficacy of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) in the prevention or treatment of the common cold. In many studies, administration of ascorbic acid failed to prevent or decrease the symptoms of the common cold.
