Dissociative disorder,  any of several mental disturbances in humans in which normally integrated mental functions, such as identity, memory, consciousness, or perception, are interrupted. Dissociative disorders can occur suddenly or gradually and may last for a short time or become chronic. There are different forms of dissociative disorders; they include dissociative identity disorder, dissociative amnesia, dissociative fugue, depersonalization disorder, and dissociative disorder not otherwise specified.
Dissociative identity disorder (formerly called multiple personality disorder) occurs when an individual displays two or more different personality states or identities that recurrently take control of the person’s behaviour. The patient may be unable to recall events over the span of time when another personality has assumed control. Dissociative identity disorder is a chronic and complex disorder and may result from severe childhood abuse (physical, emotional, or sexual) or neglect. It is diagnosed more frequently in women than in men.
Most individuals who are affected by dissociative identity disorder are unaware of their condition and may seek treatment for depression. Many patients receive other diagnoses prior to treatment and may not respond to medications. The transition (“switch”) from one personality to another is usually sudden. The degree of impairment depends on the manner in which various personality states interact with each other. The switching is a vulnerable time. Patients may attempt suicide, mutilate themselves, or become violent toward others. Some patients may undergo long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, which attempts to expose unconscious sources of suffering.
Dissociative amnesia is characterized by an inability to recall important personal information that often is associated with stress or trauma. It may be localized (inability to recall events during a circumscribed time), selective (can recall only some aspects of an event), continuous (ongoing amnesia following a specific event), or systematized (inability to recall certain categories of events). Dissociative amnesia can occur at any age but is rare in children. Its incidence is increased in soldiers in combat. It is reversible, usually beginning and ending suddenly. Recurrences are not uncommon. In severe or acute cases, hypnosis and amobarbital interview (administration of the sedative-hypnotic drug amobarbital to obtain information that the subject otherwise cannot recall) may be helpful in retrieving lost memory.
Dissociative fugue (psychogenic fugue, or fugue state) presents as sudden, unexpected travel away from one’s home with an inability to recall some or all of one’s past. Onset is sudden, usually following severe psychosocial stressors. This state usually lasts for minutes to days but may be prolonged for months. Although confusion may be present, most individuals appear to be mentally intact and do not draw attention to themselves.
Depersonalization disorder presents as recurrent episodes of depersonalization in which one feels detached or alienated from oneself. The person may feel like an observer watching himself or herself as if in a dream or movie. Depersonalization disorder usually occurs in adolescence or adulthood. Most patients experience anxiety, panic, or depression. The clinical course may be chronic with recurrences following stressful events. Impairment is usually minimal, and most patients function well, although some become incapacitated from fear of going insane.
Dissociative disorders not otherwise specified do not fit in any of the above categories. Ganser syndrome, in which the person appears to deliberately give approximate answers to simple questions (e.g., about 11 months in a year), falls in this group.
