Ear squeeze, also called Aerotitis, Aero-otitis, Barotitis, or Baro-otitis,  effects of a difference in pressure between the internal ear spaces and the external ear canal. These effects may include severe pain, inflammation, bleeding, and rupture of the eardrum membrane. Underwater divers and airplane pilots are sometimes affected.
The middle ear, the cavity behind the eardrum membrane, is connected with the nasal cavity (nasopharynx) by a thin, narrow tube known as the eustachian tube. Under normal conditions, when the external air pressure increases or decreases, air from the nose passes through the eustachian tube to equalize the pressure in the middle ear cavity; often, however, the eustachian tube becomes blocked by fluids from head colds, by small tumours, or by an excess of tonsillar tissue around the opening.
As a pilot in an unpressurized cabin ascends to higher altitudes and the external pressure decreases, air that is trapped in the middle ear expands. Usually the expanding air forces its way out of the eustachian tube so that the pressure can be equalized. If the tube is sufficiently blocked, the expanding air in the middle ear causes the eardrum membrane to bulge outward, with eventual rupturing if the pressure cannot be relieved. A pilot descending from higher altitudes has the opposite problem; as he descends, the external pressure increases. In order to equalize pressure in the middle ear cavity, air must pass from the eustachian tubes to the middle ear. It is usually harder to equalize pressures on descent than on ascent, as a vacuum is created in the middle ear that more tightly seals the eustachian tubes. The methods that are commonly employed to equalize the pressure in the ears include swallowing, yawning, chewing, elevation of the roof of the mouth, and blowing with the nose and mouth sealed. As the pressure in the ears is brought to the same level as that outside, the pain is relieved, unless damage has already been done. If the pressure within the ears is not kept the same on descent as the external pressure, the drum membranes bulge inward, bleed, and eventually break. Rupture of an eardrum membrane relieves the pain and pressure, but it may also cause dizziness, partial hearing loss, and middle ear infections. Usually if there are no serious complications, the membrane heals in three to four weeks.
Underwater divers encounter the same difficulties. The deeper they descend under water, the greater the amount of pressure upon their body. As they go down, they normally have to equalize the pressure inside their ears to the external pressure every 10 to 15 feet (3 to 4.5 metres).
