gonorrhea,  sexually transmitted disease characterized principally by inflammation of the mucous membranes of the genital tract and urethra. It is caused by the gonococcus, Neisseria gonorrhoeae—a bacterium with a predilection for the type of mucous membranes found in the genitourinary tract and adjacent areas. All gonococcal infections except eye infections in newborn infants (ophthalmia neonatorum), some instances of vulvovaginitis of young girls living in institutions, and occasional accidental eye infections in adults are transmitted by direct sexual contact.
Gonorrhea is very common, having been known for centuries by the slang term “the clap.” It is worldwide in distribution, though the precise incidence is unknown because of self-treatment, undiagnosed cases, and defective reporting. The World Health Organization estimates that 62 million people are infected annually worldwide. Increases in gonorrhea infections occur occasionally, as has been the case particularly since the mid-1990s. These increases have been attributed in part to the rise of drug-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and to inconsistent safe-sex practices. The mortality from gonorrhea is negligible, but its indirect effects on the population by its not infrequent sterilization of both sexes are incalculable.
The incubation period of gonorrhea is usually 3 to 5 days (range 2 to 10 days). The first symptoms in the male are a burning sensation upon urination and a purulent urethral discharge that may be profuse or may be so meagre as to go unnoticed. In the absence of treatment, the infection usually extends deeper, to involve the upper urethra, the neck of the urinary bladder, and the prostate gland. Urgency and frequency of urination and, occasionally, blood in the urine may follow. Spontaneous recovery may occur within a few months to a year. Particularly among homosexual or bisexual men, rectal gonorrhea may appear with pain in the perianal area and a mucous coating on the stool.
The initial symptoms in the female are, in most instances, so mild as to go unnoticed. Slight vaginal discharge with burning may occur. The disease is not usually suspected by either patient or physician until complications arise or a sexual partner is infected. Abscess of a vulvovaginal (Bartholin) gland occurs rarely as an early complication. Many women recover spontaneously from gonorrheal infections that extend no farther than the uterine cervix (mouth of the uterus). In many cases, however, the infection extends through the uterus to the fallopian tubes and ovaries—a condition known as pelvic inflammatory disease. Fever usually accompanies this extension, and lower abdominal pain is a prominent symptom. Pelvic abscess or peritonitis may result. The symptoms can be confused with those of appendicitis. Healing occurs without resort to surgery in most cases, often with some physical disability and sterility. In immature girls the infection is usually confined to the vagina.
N. gonorrhoeae can sometimes enter the bloodstream, causing disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) in virtually any organ system. In both male and female, arthritis is the most common manifestation of DGI. The process usually settles in one or two joints and may result in permanent disability in the absence of treatment. Involvement of the tendon sheaths in the region of the affected joint or joints is not uncommon. Other, very rare, complications of gonorrhea are iritis (inflammation of the iris), endocarditis, meningitis, and skin lesions.
Diagnosis is established by culture of a sample of urine or discharge. Treatment is with antibiotics. In the past, infection was treated with either penicillin or tetracycline, and one injection usually was sufficient to cure uncomplicated gonorrhea. In the 1970s, however, strains of gonococci resistant to penicillin or tetracycline emerged. Thus, fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin, the aminocyclitol antibiotic spectinomycin, and cephalosporins such as cefoxitin became increasingly used as alternatives for eliminating N. gonorrhoeae. Some strains of the bacteria, however, later developed resistance to fluoroquinolones, and eventually multidrug-resistant strains appeared. In the early 2000s, evidence of cephalosporin-resistant N. gonorrhoeae emerged.
In many places, the recommended approach to treating gonorrhea centres on dual drug therapy. Which drugs are used in dual therapy is determined in part by which drug-resistant strains are prevalent in the geographical region where infection was acquired and in some cases by whether there exists a likelihood of coinfection (such as with Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium that causes nongonococcal urethritis). An example of a dual therapy that is used in the United States is the administration of a cephalosporin, such as cefixime or ceftriaxone, in combination with azithromycin (a macrolide antibiotic) or doxycycline (a tetracycline antibiotic). This approach is used regardless of whether coinfection has been ruled out. Isolates of N. gonorrhoeae are routinely collected from patients and tested for antibiotic susceptibility, thereby facilitating the detection of new drug-resistant strains.
The administration of small doses of antibiotics sufficient to cure gonorrhea may mask the early manifestations of coexisting syphilis and delay its diagnosis. An integral part of the treatment of gonorrhea, therefore, is the so-called serological follow-up—a blood test for syphilis at least once a month for four months.
