illness anxiety disorder, formerly called hypochondriasis or hypochondria,  mental disorder characterized by an excessive preoccupation with illness and a tendency to fear or believe that one has a serious disease on the basis of the presence of insignificant physical signs or symptoms. Illness anxiety disorder is thought to be derived from the misinterpretation of normal bodily functions and cues, thereby precipitating health-related anxiety.
Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may excessively research an alleged illness or symptom (known as cyberchondria when the research medium is the Internet) and become convinced that they are ill even though such physical signs are absent. They may exaggerate the medical significance of minor aches and pains, becoming morbidly and obsessively preoccupied with the thought of a life-threatening illness. Their fears usually persist even after a thorough examination by a physician has established that no physical abnormality exists, and the physician’s reassurances have only a slight or temporary effect on such individuals’ apprehensions. Typical affected individuals do not become delusional about their health, however; they remain able to consider or admit the possibility that their fears are unfounded. Some individuals go from doctor to doctor in their effort to enlist medical resources to deal with the imagined illness; other individuals, however, avoid seeking medical care. Clinical diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is based on the persistence of illness-related fears and associated behaviour for six or more months.
Although fears of illness or medical interventions are common in the general population, past prevalence estimates for clinically defined illness anxiety disorder (when the disorder was known as hypochondriasis) indicate that the condition is relatively rare. It is equally prevalent in males and females. Whether there is any association with socioeconomic status, educational level, race, or marital status is unclear. Onset can occur at any age, but it tends to manifest in early adulthood. Illness anxiety disorder often co-occurs with other psychiatric conditions, which may include depression, an anxiety disorder, or a personality disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is distinguished from other psychosomatic illnesses by its core feature of fear of having or contracting a disease, as opposed to concern about symptoms (as in somatic symptom disorder), concern about physical appearance (as in body dysmorphic disorder), or disturbances in motor or sensory functions (as in conversion disorder).
Although illness anxiety disorder tends to be chronic and episodic, some patients do recover. Many patients respond to an individualized treatment approach, which may include cognitive behaviour therapy. Pharmacotherapy, such as the use of antidepressants, may also be used, especially when symptoms of depression are present.
