Keloid,  benign tumour and chronic skin disorder in which excessive scar tissue (mainly collagen) forms a smooth rubbery growth over, and often larger than, the original wound. Keloids are difficult to treat, and though they can form on any part of the body, they most commonly are found on the chest, shoulders, neck, and head. They are mainly triggered by an injury to the skin, such as from a fall or accident or from acne or a body piercing. Keloids typically occur between ages 5 and 25 and are one of the most common chronic pediatric skin disorders. Darker-skinned persons tend to be especially susceptible to keloids.
A normally healing wound produces minimal scar tissue. Keloid formation, on the other hand, is due to an uninhibited, excessive, and protracted wound-healing response, as if the brakes in the scar-tissue-forming process malfunctioned. The result is excess fibroblast proliferation, with collagen deposits that grow over the site of the original skin injury.
Keloids can appear as single small spots on the skin, or they can affect several areas of the skin. They can be either round or linear, and they can spread to wider areas. The broad variability in shape, size, and location is most likely due to underlying complex genetic abnormalities. In advanced stages, keloid lesions can appear as large skin nodules, as a conglomerate of nodules, or as massive skin tumours and large keloid patches. In addition to its often unpleasant appearance, a keloid lesion can cause pain, itching, and a burning sensation. Keloids sometimes also become infected.
The tendency for keloid formation has a strong genetic component, meaning individuals can inherit susceptibility to the condition. The main triggering factor is the wounding of the skin, and that can occur in countless ways. Ear piercing is by far the leading triggering factor for ear and earlobe keloids. Acne is perhaps the most common triggering factor for keloids of the face, the shoulders, and the chest area. Surgery, simple skin wounds from falls or accidents, body piercings and tattooing, face-lifts and breast augmentations, and even minute punctures (such as those produced by needles during vaccination) can trigger keloid formation in genetically prone individuals. In persons with a known family history of keloid disorder, prevention centres on protecting the skin from injury as much as possible, including protection from self-inflicted skin injuries.
Keloids can be difficult to treat, because of the risk of a new keloid developing in the treated area. Moreover, no curative treatment exists for persons with genetic susceptibility to keloids. In general, the type and success of treatment depends on the keloid’s location, size, and thickness.
Cortisone injection (or intralesional steroid injection) is a common method of treating keloids. The injection of a steroid into the keloid can be effective in some patients, leading to a breakdown of the collagen deposit and a flattening of the growth. Most patients achieve a temporary result, however, and additional treatments are often necessary to maintain the keloid’s diminished state. In a small fraction of patients, cortisone injection actually worsens the keloid.
Cryotherapy, in which the keloid is subjected to freezing, is an effective and relatively safe method of treating large keloids. In cryotherapy, liquid nitrogen is applied to the keloid, thereby inducing frostbite in the keloid tissue; that often results in tissue necrosis and destruction. Repeated treatments typically are needed, and the treated keloid requires postprocedure care. The skin surrounding the keloid may also lighten or darken as a result of the procedure.
Although surgery may be an option, a new and even larger keloid may spawn at the site of surgical excision. Surgeons attempt to minimize that risk by injecting steroids, applying pressure dressings to the wound site after surgery, or using postsurgery radiation. The use of radiation, however, can raise the risk of cancer formation at the site.
Other treatments that have been used for keloids include laser therapy, silicone sheets (in which a sheet of silicone gel is worn on the affected area), and compression dressings. Injections of fluorouracil, a compound used in cancer chemotherapy, has shown some efficacy in flattening small keloids.
