Laryngeal cancer,  malignant tumour of the larynx (voice box). There are two types of tumours found on the larynx that can be malignant. One is called a carcinoma; the other, called a papilloma, often is benign but occasionally becomes malignant.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the larynx. It occurs most often in men, particularly those between ages 55 and 65, and frequently arises from chronic irritation, overuse of the voice, or alcohol and tobacco abuse. Squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx is preceded by dysplasia, a condition characterized by the abnormal growth of epithelial cells of the larynx. Squamous cell carcinoma may attack the vocal cords, originating from the lining of the larynx. This form of the disease often remains confined to the larynx, and the patient has a good chance of recovery when the tumour is removed. Carcinoma can also develop in the area above the vocal cords and folds and may extend to the epiglottis (a flap of cartilage above the larynx) or the pharynx, the upper throat. From there, tumour cells usually invade the surrounding tissue and spread to other areas of the body by way of the lymphatic vessels.
Benign papilloma is the most common tumour of the larynx. It is a small warty growth that attaches to the vocal cords or at the joints between the cartilage plates. It is most frequent in singers, announcers, and people who use their voices strenuously and often. In adults it may form many polyps (lumps of tissue) that can plug the larynx; after removal it may reappear. A similar condition may occur in children, except that when they reach puberty the growths usually disappear spontaneously.
Laryngeal cancer typically can be treated in the early stages. However, 8 to 10 months may elapse before the first symptoms of hoarseness appear and a diagnosis is made. Once diagnosed, the primary forms of treatment include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Surgery may entail laser surgery, cordectomy (partial or complete removal of the vocal cords), laryngectomy (partial or complete removal of the larynx), or vocal cord stripping (removal of superficial vocal cord tissue, largely sparing the vocal cords). Examples of chemotherapy used to treat laryngeal cancer include cisplatin, fluorouracil, and paclitaxel. Newer treatments include the use of immunotherapy (e.g., nivolumab) and targeted therapy (e.g., cetuximab), administered in combination with radiation or standard chemotherapy.
