Leprosy, also called Hansen disease,  chronic infectious disease that affects the skin, the peripheral nerves (nerves outside the brain and spinal cord), and the mucous membranes of the nose, throat, and eyes. It is caused by the leprosy bacillus, Mycobacterium leprae. Destruction of the peripheral nerves by the bacillus leads to a loss of sensation, which, together with progressive tissue degeneration, may result in the extremities’ becoming deformed and eroded.
In almost all cultures throughout history, leprosy has aroused dread and loathing about the prospect of incurable disease and a lifetime of progressive disfigurement. At one time “lepers,” as those with the disease were long called, were ostracized as unclean and were gathered into isolated “leper colonies” in order to keep them out of sight, to control their contagiousness, and to offer them what little treatment was available. In reality, the leprosy bacillus is not highly infectious, in most cases passing from one person to another only after prolonged and close contact (as, for instance, among family members). In addition, thanks to modern therapy with a number of effective drugs, the disease is now entirely curable, and the term leper, denoting somebody who has had and always will have the disease, thus no longer has meaning and in fact is considered to be offensive because of the social stigma long associated with the disease. Health care officials today do not consider a cured former leprosy patient to be any more “leprous” than a cured former cancer patient is “cancerous.”
Since the early 1990s the prevalence of leprosy has decreased by 90 percent. Thus, whereas millions of cases of the disease were known in the 1980s, newly reported cases dropped to about 763,200 in 2001 and to some 249,000 in 2008. The disease has disappeared from most temperate countries, but it still occurs in Brazil and in some areas of Africa and southern Asia. The dramatic decline in leprosy prevalence was attributed to a resolution passed in 1991 by the World Health Assembly (the governing body of the World Health Organization [WHO]) that was designed to eliminate the disease by 2000. Disease elimination was defined as a reduction of prevalence to less than 1 case per 10,000 persons. Most countries targeted for leprosy elimination had achieved this goal by the early 21st century.
Mycobacterium leprae, the organism responsible for leprosy, is a relative of M. tuberculosis, the bacillus that causes tuberculosis. (A bacillus is a rod-shaped bacterium.) Scientists theorize that the leprosy bacillus enters the body through a break in the skin or through the mucous membranes of the nose. The disease can be transmitted from person to person by prolonged close contact, but even today scientists are uncertain of the exact mechanism. Much about leprosy remains mysterious, at least in part because the bacillus has never been grown in tissue culture and because the only tools for studying its transmission have been a limited number of animal models, chiefly armadillos and mice. The bacillus can grow in the footpads of mice, which provides an important mechanism for bacillus cultivation for experimental study.
The geographic distribution of the leprosy bacillus is another mystery. Some scientists suspect that the organism exists in the soil in many parts of the world, but, again, because it cannot be grown in a laboratory culture, the only evidence of its presence in a given region is the appearance of the disease itself in humans or other animals that are susceptible to it. Besides humans, the only animals known to develop leprosy in nature are New World armadillos and African primates. A study of wild nine-banded armadillos (Dasypus novemcinctus) and people living with leprosy in the southern United States found that the armadillos and humans were infected with a nearly identical strain of the leprosy bacillus. A subset of the infected individuals recalled having been in direct contact with armadillos. The findings suggested that, in that region of the world, leprosy may be a zoonotic disease (an illness transmitted between humans and other vertebrates).
Given that the organism that causes leprosy is widely distributed and the disease is contagious, it seems logical to ask why leprosy is not a great deal more prevalent than it is. The answer is that the infection apparently is quite difficult to contract. The vast majority of people (95 percent or so) simply are not susceptible to the bacillus and, even under repeated exposure, will never develop the disease. Among the few individuals who do contract the disease, in most cases it will be self-limiting and disappear before any symptoms become evident. Even in cases where early symptoms of leprosy develop, most patients will self-heal. This rather unusual pattern of infection, along with a three- to five-year incubation period (the time that elapses between contact with the bacillus and the onset of symptoms), makes the epidemiology of leprosy particularly difficult to study.
