leukemia,  a cancer of the blood-forming tissues characterized by a large increase in the numbers of white blood cells (leukocytes) in the circulation or bone marrow. A number of different leukemias are classified according to the course of the disease and the predominant type of white blood cell involved. Some types of leukemia have been related to radiation exposure, as noted in the Japanese population exposed to the first atomic bomb at Hiroshima; other evidence suggests hereditary susceptibility.
Leukemias are defined as either acute or chronic and as either myelogenous (from bone marrow) or lymphocytic (involving lymphocytes). These characteristics are used to designate almost all cases as one of four types—acute myelogenous, acute lymphocytic, chronic myelogenous, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Acute leukemias affect immature cells; the disease develops rapidly, with symptoms including anemia, fever, bleeding, and swelling of the lymph nodes. Immature leukemia cells continue to divide in the bone marrow, which leads to rapid death if left untreated. In chronic leukemia the cells develop and are transported to the tissues, but the cells do not function normally. Myelogenous leukemia affects granulocytes and monocytes, white blood cells that destroy bacteria and some parasites.
The most common form in children, acute lymphocytic leukemia, once killed more than 90 percent of its victims within six months. With new drug therapies, the majority of acute lymphocytic patients now achieve complete remission, with no evidence of malignant cells in the blood. With continued therapy, more than half remain free of disease for five years or longer. These patients are presumed to be cured.
Results of treatment for other leukemias have not been as positive. In acute myelogenous leukemia, which is more common in adults, patients can experience complete remission, but recurrence is common. Chronic leukemias also occur more frequently in adults. These are characterized by a more gradual onset and a more protracted course. Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), which has a peak incidence among adults in their 40s, may remain quiescent for long periods before symptoms such as weight loss, low fever, and weakness develop. Left untreated, CML may culminate in a fatal phase known as a blast crisis, which occurs when one-fifth to one-third of the cells in the blood or bone marrow are immature blood cells, or blast cells. This phase of CML can last four to six months and is characterized by fever, weakness, and an enlarged spleen.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia occurs primarily in elderly people and may be inactive for months or years. The leukemia itself is rarely the cause of death, but it renders the patient vulnerable to infection or hemorrhage.
