Muscular dystrophy,  hereditary disease that causes progressive weakness and degeneration of the skeletal muscles. Of the several types of muscular dystrophy, the more common are Duchenne, facioscapulohumeral, Becker, limb-girdle, and myotonic dystrophy. In all of these there is usually early evidence of degeneration and then regeneration of some muscle fibres. Those fibres that regenerate become larger than normal, and eventually the muscles are totally replaced by fibrous scar tissue and fat.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the most common childhood form of the disease; it occurs in one of every 3,300 male births. It is a sex-linked disorder, meaning that it strikes males almost exclusively. The disease is caused by a defective gene on the 23rd, or X, chromosome that results in the failure of the body to produce a functional muscle protein called dystrophin. Most females who carry the genetic defect are unaffected, but they have a 50 percent probability of passing the disease to each of their sons. Early symptoms, which usually occur between the ages of two and six, include a waddling gait, frequent falling, difficulty in getting up from a lying or sitting position, enlargement of the calf muscles, inability to raise the knees, and disappearance of a normal knee or ankle jerk; symptoms become more obvious as the child ages. Stairs eventually become impossible to climb, and by early adolescence the child is unable to walk. Muscle wasting progresses upward from the legs, and the arms are eventually affected. Ultimately, muscle wasting affects the muscles of the diaphragm, and breathing becomes shallow. Life-threatening pulmonary infections or respiratory failure usually occurs before the age of 20. Genetic testing can reliably detect the Duchenne gene in female carriers and in affected male fetuses.
Becker muscular dystrophy has symptoms similar to Duchenne but begins in later childhood or adolescence and progresses more slowly. It is also a sex-linked disorder that is caused by a defective gene on the X chromosome; however, some functional dystrophin is produced. Individuals with this form of muscular dystrophy may function well into adult life, with certain limitations.
Limb-girdle dystrophy (dystrophy of the pelvic or shoulder muscles) affects both sexes. The first symptoms are manifest in the pelvic region, starting in late childhood. Muscular weakness eventually progresses to the arms and legs. Symptoms include frequent falling, difficulty in climbing, and a waddling gait.
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (dystrophy related to the face, the shoulder blade, and the upper arm) starts in adolescence and affects both sexes. The first symptom may be difficulty in raising the arms. Later symptoms may include weakness of the legs and pelvic girdle, forward sloping of the shoulders, and difficulty in closing the eyes. This form of muscular dystrophy can range in severity; individuals with facioscapulohumeral dystrophy may be mildly affected or totally disabled.
Myotonic muscular dystrophy is the most common form of the disease affecting adults. The primary symptom is myotonia, a stiffening of the muscles after use. Myotonic muscular dystrophy may also affect the central nervous system, heart, gastrointestinal tract, eyes, and endocrine glands. Because of the possibility of serious cardiac complications, individuals with this form of muscular dystrophy may require a pacemaker. Myotonic muscular dystrophy type 1 and myotonic muscular dystrophy type 2 are both caused by a genetic mutation, albeit on different chromosomes, that results in defective RNA, the molecule that translates DNA into proteins. Genetic testing can detect these mutations in persons suspected to have the disease.
There is no specific cure or treatment for muscular dystrophy. Physical therapy, exercises, splints, braces, and corrective surgery may help relieve some of the symptoms. Corticosteroid medications may slow the progression of the disease.
