Myopathy,  any skeletal muscle disorder that directly affects the muscle fibres and does not arise secondarily from disorders of the nervous system. Myopathies are marked by muscular degeneration and weakness and may have a genetic or nongenetic basis.
Heritable myopathies include the muscular dystrophies, a group of metabolic diseases in which muscle fibres, predominantly of the pelvis and shoulder areas, atrophy. (See muscular dystrophy.) The most common muscular dystrophy is Duchenne’s, an X-chromosome-linked disorder involving progressive destruction of muscle tissue that usually results in death before the age of 20. Some muscle disorders, such as the mitochondrial and lipid storage myopathies, result from a genetic defect in an enzyme necessary in metabolism. Other muscle disorders can be caused by external factors such as alcohol or steroid hormones. Inflammatory myopathy, or myositis, can arise from bacteria, viruses, or parasites that specifically invade the muscle. A well-known example is trichinosis, which is caused by infection with the pork roundworm, Trichinella spiralis.
Primary myopathic changes in nonhuman animals are congenital (hereditary), idiopathic (of unknown or obscure cause), inflammatory, metabolic, nutritional, chemical, or neoplastic in origin or are the result of direct muscle injury. A congenital myopathy termed type II muscle fibre deficiency has been noted in Labrador retrievers, and in pigs myofibrillar hypoplasia (spraddleleg) is a congenital myopathy. Idiopathic ossification of muscles near the hip joints of Doberman pinschers has been reported; the condition also occurs in pigs (myositis ossificans). An eosinophilic myositis occurs in the masticatory muscles of dogs and is thought to be an immune-mediated disease. Feline hypokalemic polymyopathy, a metabolic myopathy, is associated with low potassium levels and results in muscle weakness. Exertional myopathies have been noted in horses and working dogs and are the result of metabolic changes secondary to excitement and exercise that compromise blood flow to skeletal muscles; this syndrome is also termed azoturia, “tying-up,” and Monday morning disease. Nutritional myopathies occur as a result of vitamin E or selenium deficiencies, or both, in calves and lambs (white muscle disease) and in poultry. Myopathies are associated with primary skeletal muscle tumours such as rhabdomyomas or with metastatic spread of lymphosarcomas. Exposure of horses to high concentrations of the bovine growth-promoting drug monensin causes a serious cardiac myopathy. A fibrotic myopathy has been noted following shoulder injury in hunting dogs.
