Myositis,   inflammation, and frequently infection, of muscle tissue; it may be caused by any of a number of bacteria, viruses, and parasites; in many cases it is of unknown origin. Most inflammatory muscle diseases are destructive to the tissue involved and to the surrounding areas. They may occur at any age; children seem to have a higher incidence than adults.
Bacteria may cause damage by direct infection of the muscles or by producing substances—toxins—that poison the tissue. The most common bacterial infections are streptococcal or staphylococcal. The muscle tissue is generally highly resistant to bacterial invasion, but when physical injuries occur there is a weakening of defense mechanisms that leads to infection. The onset of disease may be manifested by headaches, fever, chills, and sweating. There is local pain and swelling in the tissue, commonly followed by pustulant abscesses. Initially the muscle remains intact; as the infection progresses there is infiltration by white blood cells, lymph cells, and fibrous scar tissue (fibrosis). The tissue affected may be destroyed, and abscesses may become fibrous cysts that may require surgical removal.
Chronic diseases such as tuberculosis or syphilis are known to involve the muscles. In tuberculosis there may be abscesses and calcification of the muscle. The tissue can degenerate into fatty and fibrous elements. The disease may be totally incapacitating to the sufferer in the advanced stages. Syphilis does not generally affect the muscles until the terminal stages of the disease. It may cause soft tumours in the eyes, chest, extremities, throat, and heart; and muscles may be converted into scar tissue.
Parasites such as tapeworms or protozoa may enter the body in contaminated food, invade the intestines, and enter the bloodstream to lodge in the muscle tissue. One such parasite is the pork tapeworm larva, Cysticercus, which causes nodules in the muscle tissue and brain. The organism grows, lays its eggs, and then dies. The nodes become calcified and may be seen on X rays.
