Pyelonephritis,   infection and inflammation of the kidney tissue and the renal pelvis (the cavity formed by the expansion of the upper end of the ureter, the tube that conveys urine to the bladder). The infection is usually bacterial. The most common type of renal disorder, pyelonephritis may be chronic or acute.
Acute pyelonephritis generally affects one specific region of the kidney, leaving the rest of the kidney structure untouched. In many instances pyelonephritis develops without any apparent precipitating cause. Any obstruction to the flow of blood or urine, however, may make the kidneys more susceptible to infection, and fecal soiling of the urethral opening is thought to increase the incidence of the disease in infants (the urethra is the channel for urine from the bladder to the outside). Women may suffer injury of the urinary passages during intercourse or pregnancy, and catheterization (mechanical draining of urine) can cause infection.
In acute pyelonephritis the lining of the renal structures into which urine drains, the renal pelvis and the calyces, may be inflamed. Abscesses may form in the kidney tissue, and some of the nephron tubules (urine-producing structures) may be destroyed. Medical treatment abates the infection over a period of one to three weeks. As healing takes place, scar tissue forms at the site of infection, but there is usually sufficient healthy tissue to maintain relatively normal renal functions. The symptoms of acute pyelonephritis usually include fever, chills, pain or aches in the lower back and flanks, bladder inflammation, tenderness in the kidney region, white blood cells in the urine, and a high urine bacterial count. Treatment usually requires suppression of bacterial growth by means of antibiotic drugs.
Chronic pyelonephritis results from bacterial infections in the kidneys over a period of years. Each episode of infection may pass unnoticed but may destroy more and more areas of tissue until the amount of functional kidney tissue is far less than the scar tissue that has formed. If only one kidney is involved or if the affected areas are limited, surgery may restore some functioning. Active infections are treated with antibacterial drugs. Frequently there is widespread and permanent destruction of renal tissue by the time the malady is discovered. Death can ensue from urine poisoning (uremia), severe current infections, or heart and vascular disorders precipitated by the renal condition. Use of artificial-kidney machines or a renal transplant can sometimes prolong life. 
