Restless legs syndrome,  condition characterized by an uncontrollable urge to move the legs that usually appears during periods of rest, especially while sitting or lying down. Many experience symptoms immediately before the onset of sleep. A person with restless legs syndrome experiences various sensations in the legs, such as pressure, pins and needles, pulling, crawling, or pinching, but rarely pain; occasional involuntary jerking movements also may occur. Temporary relief may be provided by movement of the legs. Symptoms will continue to worsen with aging if left untreated.
The cause of restless legs syndrome is unknown, although it may accompany other conditions, including insufficiency of the blood supply to the legs, nerve damage (e.g., peripheral neuritis), diabetes, anemia, kidney disease, and infections such as prostatitis and cystitis. Restless legs syndrome occasionally occurs during pregnancy, especially in the third trimester. In older people, it may precede the onset of Parkinson disease. In 2007 scientists discovered an association between restless legs syndrome and variations (called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs) in three different genes. One of these SNPs, in a gene known as BTBD9, is associated with an increased risk of involuntary limb movements. This single variation in BTBD9 is estimated to account for more than 50 percent of cases of restless legs syndrome in people of European descent.
Treatment of restless legs syndrome is directed toward the underlying condition; for example, proper correction of vascular insufficiency may eliminate the disorder. Massage, exercise, hot or cold packs, and the avoidance of stimulants such as caffeine or alcohol before sleep may eliminate the condition or provide some relief. Various drugs, ranging from tranquilizers to antiepileptics, have been effective in some patients. A drug approved to treat this disorder is ropinirole hydrochloride (e.g., Requip™), a dopamine agonist—that is, a drug that mimics or enhances the action of dopamine, an important neurotransmitter in the brain.
