Traumatic brain injury,  any damage to the brain from an applied force. The forces involved can be from direct contact, as in a blunt or penetrating head injury; from a gravitational source such as fierce shaking; or from rotational energy that produces shear stress between the brain and the skull. Often, a combination of forces is involved; for example, a motor vehicle collision can cause both direct blunt trauma and injury from rotational and rapid velocity changes. Those events cause a deformation of the brain tissue that results in several types of pathology. In addition to the primary injury (caused at the moment the force is applied), a series of events are set in motion that continue to cause cellular damage over the next days to weeks or even longer. Those secondary injury events include a complex set of biochemical reactions and molecular changes that extend cellular damage, brain edema (swelling), and inflammation in a self-perpetuating cycle that rapidly increases the extent of the brain damage.
Traumatic brain injury is broadly defined in terms of three categories of severity—mild, moderate, and severe—based on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS). The GCS is a 15-point scale designed to measure the patient’s ability to respond to visual, verbal, and motor stimuli after traumatic brain injury. The degree of impairment depends on the extent of damage to critical brain areas. The majority of traumatic brain injuries are mild. Nonetheless, traumatic brain injury is a significant cause of death. In the United States, for example, 40 percent of deaths from acute injury are due to traumatic brain injury. Traumatic brain injury is also a major source of disability, resulting in sometimes permanent impairment of physical and cognitive function.
Direct contact with the skull or brain is classified as blunt trauma (e.g., from impact with a baseball bat or a windshield) or penetrating trauma (e.g., from gunshot wounds, shrapnel, or knives). Blunt contact causes injury directly below the contact point. The impact can also cause the brain to move or to shift back and forth inside the skull, damaging the opposite side of the brain, in a contrecoup injury. The base of the skull is bony and rough and can cause tearing and bruising to brain tissue when it bounces back and forth. The extent of damage varies with the intensity of force applied. The primary injuries that result are contusions (bruising of the brain tissue), tearing of the tissue and blood vessels, bleeding, tissue shearing, and disruption of neuronal networks. Blunt head injury may be closed or open, if the skull has been compromised to the point that brain tissue is exposed to the environment.
In addition to the direct blow, blunt trauma to the head causes the transmission of forces throughout the brain tissue. If strong enough, they can cause shearing and disruption of tissue and neural networks deep within the brain. That type of damage tends to be diffuse and can result in axonal damage (diffuse axonal injury, or DAI), diffuse edema, and extensive neuronal death. The damage can extend the secondary injury throughout the brain, to areas far from the point of original contact. The same acceleration forces that cause DAI can also cause stretching and tearing of blood vessels, leading to subcortical hemorrhages, additional neuronal damage, and disrupted functional activity in otherwise intact neurons.
Penetrating injury results in different injury patterns from blunt injury. The biggest factors in the degree of damage from a penetrating injury are the velocity and mass of the projectile. Shells from high-powered rifles and other high-velocity projectiles can cause an enormous pressure wave that damages the brain tissue in predictable patterns and can be massive and devastating. Lower-velocity projectiles cause less pressure-wave damage and less direct shrapnel path damage. As with blunt traumatic brain injury, penetrating injury sets off a secondary injury cascade.
The initial trauma to the brain that kills or damages nerve cells is only the first step in a drawn-out and complex cascade of events that cause further cell death. Immediately after a traumatic brain injury, cells at or close to the site of injury are mortally wounded, while others farther away from the injury are less-extensively wounded. However, within hours to days after the injury, if metabolic and cellular machinery in the nerves is too perturbed, the cells swell and die through necrosis. Necrosis can be caused by inflammatory factors produced in the brain, by free radicals entering into the brain, or by the excessive release of excitatory neurotransmitters, such as glutamate. Some cells that survive the initial injury may die days, weeks, or months later, when mechanisms inside the nucleus of the cell trigger a breakdown of its DNA. That process is known as apoptosis, or programmed cell death, because it is triggered by genes within the cell nucleus that respond to external signals caused by the injury.
Components of the secondary injury cascade include anoxia (absence of oxygen), hypoxemia (low oxygen content in the blood), hypotension (low blood pressure), anemia (low blood cell count), hemorrhage (bleeding in the brain), edema, and increased intracranial pressure. Edema is a common component of traumatic brain injury that occurs when disruption of the blood-brain barrier allows fluid to leak into the brain or when cellular swelling follows cell-membrane damage and ion-transport dysfunction. Edema increases intracranial pressure and can result in further damage to brain tissue. If intracranial pressure continues to increase, it leads to compression of the brain tissue and eventual herniation of tissue through the brain stem, resulting in death. In addition to edema, any new lesion or mass that occupies space causes increased intracranial pressure after traumatic brain injury, and if those masses continue to grow, permanent brain damage ensues.
Outcome after traumatic brain injury can vary widely depending on the location and extent of damage, age and sex of the patient, prior medical conditions, socioeconomic and educational status, early treatment interventions, and subsequent extent of rehabilitation and medical therapy. An equally broad range of symptoms—loss of consciousness and coma, persistent vegetative state, seizures, disrupted motor functions, visual defects, dizziness, disordered language, disordered executive functions and communication skills, lack of emotional control, diminished (or enhanced) sex drive, depression, changes in personality, inability to focus, loss of attention, and impaired memory (especially short-term processing of information)—can occur in the successive stages after traumatic brain injury.
In the absence of treatments, symptoms can persist indefinitely, although there may be gradual amelioration that can sometimes be improved with rehabilitation therapy. Many patients diagnosed with mild traumatic brain injury develop behavioral problems and symptoms that prevent them from returning fully to their preinjury lifestyles or work, and in about 30 percent of cases, they are accused of malingering (feigning illness), although that condition is not easy to verify. There has been accumulating evidence that even mild but repeated head injuries (e.g., those associated with sports such as boxing or gridiron football) that occur over time can result in cumulative impairments that can be disabling or even fatal.
Clinically effective treatments than can directly repair the damaged brain are lacking. Basic research in that area focuses either on developing neuroprotective drugs that can prevent swelling, necrosis, and apoptosis or on neuroplasticity-enhancing agents or physiological techniques that encourage intact nerve cells to grow new branches or to increase or change their activity to replace lost or damaged neurons. A third category of research, using stem cells or genetically modified cells (e.g., glial cells) that are transplanted into the zone of injury, seeks to replace damaged cells with substitute neurons or other cells that can restore function.
