Turner syndrome, also called gonadal dysgenesis,  relatively uncommon sex-chromosome disorder that causes aberrant sexual development in human females. Turner syndrome occurs when one sex chromosome is deleted, so that instead of the normal 46 chromosomes, of which two are sex chromosomes (XX in females and XY in males), the chromosomal complement is 45,X. In genetic terms, these patients are neither male nor female because the second, sex-determining chromosome is absent. However, phenotypically, affected individuals develop as females because there is no Y chromosome to direct the fetal gonads to the male configuration.
Clinically, patients with Turner syndrome are short, and they have a small chin, prominent folds of skin at the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), low-set ears, a webbed neck, and a shieldlike chest. Individuals with Turner syndrome also have an increased incidence of anomalies of the heart and large blood vessels. Both the internal and the external genitalia are infantile, and the ovaries are only “streaks” of connective tissue. The diagnosis may be made during infancy or childhood on the basis of these anomalies or at puberty when the individual fails to develop secondary sex characteristics or has no menses. In genetic terms, Turner syndrome is common: one-tenth of all spontaneously aborted fetuses have a 45,X chromosome constitution, and only 3 percent of affected fetuses survive to term.
Patients with Turner syndrome can be treated with growth hormone during childhood to increase linear growth. Affected individuals should also be treated with estrogen and progestin (similar to progesterone) at the time of puberty in order to stimulate the appearance of secondary sexual characteristics and the monthly vaginal bleeding that simulates a menstrual cycle. Estrogen and progestin also prevent osteoporosis, which will occur if ovarian deficiency is not treated.
There are multiple variants of Turner syndrome. For example, there are mixtures of chromosomes (mosaics), such as a 45,X and 46,XX chromosomal complement or a 45,X and 47,XXX chromosomal complement, and chromosomal translocations, in which a portion of one chromosome is transferred to another chromosome. Another variant is the 45,X/46,XY mosaic, in which a person may be reared as either a male or a female because the genitalia are “ambiguous,” meaning that it is difficult to determine whether the phallus is an enlarged clitoris or a small penis. Patients with this variant of Turner syndrome have streak gonads, and the presence of the Y chromosome is associated with an increased risk of development of a malignant tumour of the streak gonad.
