typhoid fever, also called typhoid,  acute infectious disease caused by the bacterium Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi. The bacterium usually enters the body through the mouth by the ingestion of contaminated food or water, penetrates the intestinal wall, and multiplies in lymphoid tissue; it then enters the bloodstream and causes bacteremia.
Most major epidemics of typhoid fever have been caused by the pollution of public water supplies. Food and milk may be contaminated, however, by a human carrier of the disease who is employed in handling and processing them; by flies; or by the use of polluted water for cleaning purposes. Shellfish, particularly oysters, grown in polluted water and fresh vegetables grown on soil fertilized or contaminated by untreated sewage are other possible causes.
The prevention of typhoid fever depends mainly on proper sewage treatment, filtration and chlorination of water, and exclusion of carriers from employment in food industries and restaurants. In the early part of the 20th century, prophylactic vaccination using killed typhoid organisms was introduced, mainly in military forces and institutions, and contributed to a lowering of the incidence of the disease.
After an average 10–14-day incubation period, the early symptoms of typhoid appear: headache, malaise, generalized aching, fever, and restlessness that may interfere with sleep. There may be loss of appetite, nosebleeds, cough, and diarrhea or constipation. Persistent fever develops and gradually rises, usually in a stepwise fashion, reaching a peak of 39 or 40 °C (103 or 104 °F) after 7–10 days; left untreated, the fever continues with only slight morning remissions for another 10–14 days, sometimes longer.
During about the second week of fever, typhoid bacilli are present in great numbers in the bloodstream. At that point, some patients develop a rash of small rose-coloured spots on the trunk, which lasts four or five days and then fades away. The lymph follicles (Peyer patches) along the intestinal wall in which the typhoid bacilli have multiplied become inflamed and necrotic and may slough off, leaving ulcers in the walls of the intestine. The dead fragments of intestinal tissue may erode blood vessels, causing hemorrhage, or they may perforate the intestinal wall, allowing the intestine’s contents to enter the peritoneal cavity (peritonitis). Other complications can include acute inflammation of the gallbladder, heart failure, pneumonia, osteomyelitis, encephalitis, and meningitis. With a continued high fever, the symptoms usually increase in intensity, and mental confusion and delirium may appear.
By the end of the third week, the patient is emaciated, abdominal symptoms are marked, and mental disturbance is prominent. In favourable cases, about the beginning of the fourth week, the fever begins to decline, the symptoms begin to abate, and the temperature gradually returns to normal. If untreated, typhoid fever proves fatal in about 10 to 30 percent of all cases; with treatment, as few as 1 percent of patients die from the disease. Patients with diseases such as cancer or sickle cell anemia are particularly prone to develop serious and prolonged infection with S. Typhi.
Diagnosis of typhoid fever is made by blood culture, stool culture, and serological testing. Infection is treated with antibiotics, primarily fluoroquinolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin), ceftriaxone, or azithromycin (or some combination thereof). Those agents help rid the body of S. Typhi, consequently lowering the patient’s fever and enabling progressive improvement thereafter.
The treatment of typhoid fever has been complicated by the emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains of S. Typhi. Historically, the antibiotic of choice against the disease was chloramphenicol. In the 1970s, because of widespread chloramphenicol resistance, ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole became the treatments of choice. Those drugs, however, were eventually rendered ineffective by multidrug-resistant S. Typhi. Strains of the bacterium that are resistant to contemporary antibiotics, including fluoroquinolones, have been increasingly reported in Asia and Africa.
Typhoid bacteria can persist for an indefinite period of time in the bile passages of patients. If they practice poor hygiene or if they are food handlers, those carriers can pass the infection to healthy persons. Patients who are recovering from typhoid fever are transient carriers of the disease, excreting the causative bacteria in the stool or urine for up to three months. Patients who continue to excrete the bacteria for a year or more after infection are considered to be long-term carriers; those individuals harbour the microorganisms and typically shed them for years.
One of the most famous instances of carrier-borne disease in medical history was the case of “Typhoid Mary” (byname of Mary Mallon). Fifty-one original cases of typhoid and three deaths were directly attributed to her during the early 20th century.
