Workaholism, also called work addiction,  compulsive desire to work. Workaholism is defined in various ways. In general, however, it is characterized by working excessive hours (beyond workplace or financial requirements), by thinking continually about work, and by a lack of work enjoyment, which are unrelated to actual workplace demands. Workaholism may be seen as a prerequisite for success, and, as a consequence, some individuals may find it extremely difficult to release themselves from work, even when they are given the opportunity to do so. Workaholism is associated with reduced physical health and with various psychiatric disorders, including anxiety, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
Although the term workaholism has become commonplace, there has been little empirical research (and consensus) into what it means when someone is referred to as a workaholic. The modest amount of existing research has been done in a fragmentary manner. Without a common definition, however, it becomes challenging to develop a holistic picture of workaholism.
A commonly held perspective is that workaholism is simply an extreme form of job involvement. Although the two constructs have been considered synonymous in the practitioner literature, job involvement is clearly distinct from workaholism in that job involvement has an attitudinal component regarding work, whereas workaholism refers to behavioral patterns and an overall outlook on work. High job involvement does not necessarily relate to workaholism in that workers might be highly engaged in their jobs and consider work as a key element in their lives yet not be workaholics (e.g., they can still leave work at the end of an eight-hour day and not think about it until returning to work the next day). Hence, workaholism is not merely an extreme case of job involvement.
In an attempt to define workaholism, some researchers have placed a quantitative requirement on its borders in that the total number of hours worked per week determines workaholic tendencies. Studies have shown, however, that number of hours worked is not by itself an indicator of workaholism. Many external reasons, such as the need for money or the organizational climate (i.e., overall atmosphere of the workplace), may explain an individual’s long work hours. Workaholics, by contrast, may be intrinsically motivated to work long hours because of an inability to disengage from work.
Other research has highlighted additional factors, such as attitudes and value-based characteristics of workaholism. From these perspectives, workaholism can be conceptualized in terms of the worker’s attitude with regard to the job, including enthusiasm, commitment, and involvement. Another emergent body of literature defined workaholism as consisting of three behavioral tendencies: spending discretionary time in work activities, thinking about work when not at work, and working beyond organizational or economic requirements. The most frequently used self-report measure of workaholism, developed by American psychologists Janet T. Spence and Ann Robbins, uses a scale that consists of three factors: excessive work involvement, drivenness to work, and lack of work enjoyment.
The workaholic is portrayed by a set of distinct characteristics. Employees who experience high work involvement, high drive to work, and low work enjoyment together are more likely to be workaholics than those who just experience a subset of the symptoms. In addition, a large stream of research has found that typical variables associated with workaholism include job involvement, work stress, and work-life imbalance. The empirical literature has also shown that workaholics experience less job and life satisfaction than nonworkaholics.
Workaholism is detrimental to individual well-being, causing stress, burnout, anxiety, and health complaints. Additionally, workaholics are more prone to secondary addictions, such as alcoholism and overeating. Workaholism may also affect the lives of the people with whom the workaholic employee is associated. Excessive engagement in work is likely to disrupt work-life balance, such as balancing both personal and family needs with work demands, and may hinder interpersonal relationships. Spouses and children of workaholics may feel lonely, unloved, and emotionally or physically abandoned. Workaholism can strain marital relations, leading to divorce. Finally, workaholism can result in negative work outcomes (e.g., absenteeism, turnover). In fact, the high (and likely unrealistic) standards set by workaholic managers could lead to resentment, conflict, and low morale among coworkers. The excessive costs of workaholism to the self, the family, and the organization itself warrant that individuals pay closer attention to this crucial concept.
In order to create effective intervention programs, it is imperative that both the correlates and symptoms of workaholism be taken into account by mental health professionals and career counselors. A dimensional focus enables practitioners and their clients to examine specific correlates of workaholism instead of the global construct. For example, in terms of work-life balance, it is imperative that workplace standards be supportive of balanced priorities and healthy lifestyles, which may help encourage workaholics to make beneficial behavioral changes.
