Alexandre Millerand,  (born Feb. 10, 1859, Paris, Fr.—died  April 7, 1943, Versailles), French lawyer and statesman who, as president of the Republic (1920–1924), was noted for his desire to strengthen the power of the president by constitutional revision.
Educated for the bar, Millerand was elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a socialist in 1885. He soon became the leader of the socialist left and until 1896 edited their organ, La Petite République. In 1899 he joined René Waldeck-Rousseau’s Cabinet of “republican defense” as minister of commerce and applied himself to bettering labour conditions, to upgrading the mercantile marine, and to developing trade, educational resources, and the postal system.
In 1909 Millerand became minister of public works in Aristide Briand’s first Cabinet, his principal achievement being the reorganization of the state railways. With Briand he assumed responsibility for using troops to suppress the railway strike of October 1910. Appointed minister of war under Raymond Poincaré in 1912, he reorganized the higher command and for the first time gave a definite status to military aeronautics. He retained the same post in René Viviani’s Cabinet until he resigned in October 1915. In 1918 he was elected a member of the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques.
On the resignation of Georges Clemenceau in January 1920, Millerand formed a Cabinet and became premier and minister for foreign affairs. Mainly concerned with the application of the Treaty of Versailles, in May 1920 he frustrated attempts to organize revolutionary strikes; he also did much to supply war materiel to Poland during the Polish-Soviet war.
In September 1920 Paul Deschanel, president of the Republic, was forced by ill health to resign. Millerand, at this time leader of the Bloc National (a right-centre moderate coalition), was elected Deschanel’s successor. During his candidature Millerand made no secret of his wish to strengthen the power of the president by a revision of the constitution. His concept of the presidency brought him into collision with the radical and socialist majority, which, under the name of the Cartel des Gauches, was successful in the elections of May 1924. Violently attacked by the left majority for ignoring the traditional presidential neutrality by openly favouring conservatives, he was unable to form an acceptable Cabinet and had to resign.
From 1927 to 1940 Millerand played a secondary role in the Senate. Among his published works are Le Socialisme réformiste (1903) and Pour la défense nationale (1913).
