Johan Friis,   (born Feb. 20, 1494, Lundbygaard, Swed.—died  Dec. 5, 1570, Køge, Den.), Danish statesman who, as chancellor under Christian III, king of Denmark and Norway, helped to establish the Lutheran Church as the state church in Denmark and to reform the state and local administrations.
Friis served as secretary at the court of King Frederick I and became successor-designate to the chancellor. When a civil war (the Count’s War; 1533–36) broke out over the succession to the throne following Frederick’s death (1533), Friis tried to persuade the nobles of Fyn province to join their Jutland colleagues in supporting the claims of Frederick’s eldest son, Christian III. He was taken prisoner by forces supporting the deposed (1523) king Christian II but escaped and rejoined Christian III in 1535.
After Christian III’s assumption of power in 1536, Friis became the King’s principal adviser, helping to carry out his religious and administrative reforms. Friis directly supervised the confiscation of Catholic church property, which helped Christian reduce his war debt.
The growing influence of Friis and the Rigsråd (Council of the Realm) caused the King to declare war on the emperor Charles V (who wanted to place the daughters of Christian II on the Scandinavian thrones). The war was resolved by the Diet of Speyer (1544), a settlement favourable to Denmark. Friis also overcame objections of the Holstein nobility in 1544 when he divided Schleswig and Holstein among the King and his younger brothers.
Friis inspired Danish nobles to enter careers of public service and was also a great patron of the arts. He sponsored continuation and translation of the work of the 12th- and 13th-century Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus and introduced Renaissance architecture to Denmark in the building of his own houses. He was disappointed by the outbreak of the Seven Years’ War of the North (1563), believing that war could have been avoided if his advice to Christian III and to Christian’s successor, Frederick II, to assert Danish power in Scandinavia had been heeded.
