John Russell, 1st Earl Russell, also called (until 1861) Lord John Russell,  (born Aug. 18, 1792, London, Eng.—died  May 28, 1878, Pembroke Lodge, Richmond Park, Surrey), prime minister of Great Britain (1846–52, 1865–66), an aristocratic liberal and leader of the fight for passage of the Reform Bill of 1832.
Russell was the third son of John Russell, 6th Duke of Bedford. (As the younger son of a peer, he was known for most of his life as Lord John Russell; he himself was created earl in 1861.) He thus came of a family that had long demonstrated its public spirit. The depth of his liberalism probably owed much to an untypical education. Poor health forbade the rigours of an English public school, and later, his father, who was critical of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, sent him to the University of Edinburgh, where he drank deeply of Scottish philosophy.
In 1813 he became a member of Parliament and four years later made his first important speech—characteristically, an attack on the government’s suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. In December 1819 Russell took up the cause of parliamentary reform, making it in the early 1820s not only his own cause but also that of the Whig Party. When the Whigs came to power in 1830, he joined the small ministerial committee that was to draft a reform bill, and on March 31, 1831, he presented it to the House of Commons. Overnight, he had won a national reputation.
In the 1830s and ’40s, Russell remained the chief promoter of liberal reform in the Whig Party—although never again, perhaps, was this role so glorious as in the protracted but successful conflict over the passing of the first Reform Bill. As paymaster general under Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey, during roughly the first half of the 1830s, Russell championed the cause of religious freedom for both English Dissenters and Irish Roman Catholics. Indeed, he pursued these aims so zealously that, in seeking to divert some of the wealth of the established Church of Ireland (which was Protestant) to the Roman Catholics (who formed the bulk of the population), he frightened such leading Whigs as Lord Stanley (later Earl of Derby) out of the party. In the second half of the 1830s, as home secretary under Lord Melbourne, Russell, among other things, democratized the government of large towns (with the exception of London). He also reduced the number of criminal offenses liable to capital punishment and began the system of state inspection and support of public education.
Even out of office from 1841 to 1846, when he stood in opposition to Sir Robert Peel, Russell left his mark. In 1845, in advance of his party, he came out in favour of total free trade, a crucial step in forcing Peel to follow him. As a result Peel split his party, the Whigs came to power, and Russell became prime minister.
This administration (1846–52) demonstrated that, although Russell’s penchant for advanced ideas was as strong as ever, his ability to implement them was now seriously reduced. He was able to establish the 10-hour day in factory labour (1847) and to found a national board of public health (1848). But, largely because of party disunity and weak leadership, he was unable to end the civil disabilities of the Jews, extend the franchise to the workers in the cities, or guarantee security of tenure to the Irish farmers.
In the remaining years of his public career, Russell’s difficulties increased. Party disunity continued and brought down his second administration (1865–66) when he made his last attempt to extend the franchise. But more significant, in the 1850s the national temper had changed. An age of reform had given way to a mood of self-complacency, even of belligerence. This was already evident in the Ecclesiastical Titles Act of 1851, which Russell’s government had passed and which in effect was England’s defiance of the papacy.
This mood deepened, transformed, on the one hand, into an appetite for foreign conquest and, on the other, into boredom with social and political reform. In such an atmosphere Russell was inevitably overshadowed by the forceful and popular Lord Palmerston, who seized the forefront of the national stage in the Crimean War (1854–56). Indeed, for four years, from 1855 to 1859, Russell retired from public life and devoted more and more of his time to literature. Private life had always beckoned to him, as had the life of a litterateur. Among the English prime ministers, few wrote so copiously—biography, history, poetry—as Russell. He accepted an earldom in 1861, and he died at Pembroke Lodge, Richmond Park, in 1878.
