Mindon,  (born 1814, Amarapura, Myanmar [Burma]—died  Oct. 1, 1878, Mandalay), king of Myanmar from 1853 to 1878. His reign was notable both for its reforms and as a period of cultural flowering in the period before the imposition of complete colonial rule.
Mindon was a brother of Pagan (reigned 1846–53), who had ruled during the Second Anglo-Burmese War in 1852. As soon as he became king, Mindon sued for peace and began negotiations with the British on the status of Pegu (in southern Myanmar), which the British had occupied during the war. Frustrated in his attempts to persuade them to return Pegu, the king was obliged to accept a much-reduced dominion, cut off from the sea and deprived of some of the richest teak forests and rice-growing regions. To avoid further trouble, he signed a commercial treaty in 1867 that gave the British generous economic concessions in the unoccupied parts of Myanmar. In 1872 he sent his chief minister, the Kinwun Mingyi U Gaung, on a diplomatic mission to London, Paris, and Rome to secure international recognition of Myanmar’s status as an independent country and to appeal for restoration of its lost territory.
Mindon’s reign is sometimes considered to have been a golden age of Myanmar culture and religious life. In 1857 he built a new capital, Mandalay, with palaces and monasteries that are masterpieces of traditional Myanmar architecture. The king also sought to make Mandalay a centre of Buddhist learning, convening the Fifth Buddhist Council there in 1871 in an effort to revise and purify the Pāli scriptures.
Despite conservative opposition, Mindon promoted numerous reforms. The most important were the thathameda, the assessed land tax, and fixed salaries for government officials. He standardized the country’s weights and measures, built roads and a telegraph system, and was the first Myanmar king to issue coinage. Mindon’s reign compares favourably with that of Mongkut of Siam (Thailand), even though Siam enjoyed the privileged position of a buffer state between British and French possessions, while the continued existence of an independent Myanmar kingdom was a hindrance to British interests.
Mindon was succeeded by his son, Thibaw (reigned 1878–85), who was to be the last king of Myanmar. 
