René-Nicolas-Charles-Augustin de Maupeou,  (born Feb. 25, 1714, Paris, France—died  July 29, 1792, Thuit), chancellor of France who succeeded in temporarily (1771–74) depriving the Parlements (high courts of justice) of the political powers that had enabled them to block the reforms proposed by the ministers of King Louis XV. By rescinding Maupeou’s measures, King Louis XVI (reigned 1774–92) lost his opportunity to institute fundamental reforms that might have prevented the outbreak of the French Revolution.
Maupeou was born into a prominent family of the noblesse de robe (judicial nobility). Trained in law, he became president of the Parlement of Paris in 1763, when his father, René-Charles de Maupeou, was made keeper of the seals. The elder Maupeou resigned within 24 hours after assuming the chancellorship on Sept. 15, 1768, and René-Nicolas was then appointed chancellor in his place.
In the following year Maupeou brought the abbé Joseph-Marie Terray into the ministry as controller general of finances. Terray’s plans to stabilize royal finances by levying taxes on the privileged classes were certain to meet with vigorous opposition from the Parlements. Hence Maupeou took the offensive by provoking the judges of the Parlement of Paris into calling a judicial strike. On the night of Jan. 19–20, 1771, he ordered the magistrates of the Parlement to resume their duties. When nearly all the judges refused to comply, Maupeou exiled 130 of them to remote provinces and deprived them of their offices. The following month he established six regional courts that were to handle judicial matters in most of the vast area over which the Parlement of Paris had exercised jurisdiction. In April he set up a smaller version of the Parlement of Paris, but limited its activities to trying crown cases and registering royal edicts. Louis XV allowed Maupeou to suppress only two of the seven provincial Parlements.
Nevertheless, Maupeou’s decrees amounted to a coup d’état against the hereditary noblesse de robe, which he began to replace with appointed, salaried judges. Most important, he had denied the Parlement of Paris the right to veto royal edicts. As a result, Terray was able to proceed with his plans for tax reform.
Since Maupeou hoped to establish an enlightened royal despotism, his measures aroused the fury of the nobles and wealthy bourgeoisie whose interests had been protected by the Parlements and who, however desirous of reform, were by 1771 unwilling to accept it from the hands of the king and his ministers. Nevertheless, by the end of Louis XV’s reign, the chancellor’s new judicial system was operating successfully. After the accession of King Louis XVI in May 1774, however, Maupeou’s enemies gained the upper hand. Louis XVI restored the Parlements to their former powers and privileges in August, and Maupeou was forced into retirement. The failure of Maupeou prefigured the failure of Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot and, with it, the fall of the monarchy itself in the Revolution.
