Robert Peel, in full Sir Robert Peel, 2nd Baronet,  (born February 5, 1788, Bury, Lancashire, England—died July 2, 1850, London), British prime minister (1834–35, 1841–46) and founder of the Conservative Party. Peel was responsible for the repeal (1846) of the Corn Laws that had restricted imports.
He was the eldest son of a wealthy cotton manufacturer, Robert Peel (1750–1830), who was made a baronet by William Pitt the Younger. The younger Robert was educated at Harrow and at Oxford, and, with his father’s money, a parliamentary seat was found for him as soon as he came of age, in 1809.
As an able government supporter, Peel received appointment as undersecretary for war and colonies in 1810. Two years later he accepted the difficult post of chief secretary for Ireland. There he made his reputation as a skilled and incorruptible administrator, and, at the end of his Irish secretaryship, he was marked out for early promotion. He had also distinguished himself as the ablest of the “Protestant” party that resisted the admittance of Roman Catholics to Parliament, and in 1817 he gained the coveted honour of election as member of Parliament for the University of Oxford. Though declining immediate office after his return from Ireland, he was made chairman, in 1819, of the important currency commission that brought about a return to the gold standard.
In the 1822 ministerial reconstruction pursued by Robert Banks Jenkinson, 2nd earl of Liverpool, Peel accepted the post of secretary of state for the home department and a seat in the cabinet. His first task was to meet the long-standing demands in Parliament for a radical reform of the criminal laws. He then proceeded to a comprehensive reorganization of the criminal code. Between 1825 and 1830 he effected its fundamental consolidation and reform, covering three-quarters of all criminal offenses. Rising crime statistics convinced him that legal reform should be accompanied by improved methods of crime prevention. In 1829 he carried through the Metropolitan Police Act, which set up the first disciplined police force for the Greater London area. As a result of Peel’s efforts, the London police force became known as Bobby’s boys and later simply as bobbies.
When George Canning succeeded Liverpool as prime minister in 1827, Peel resigned on the issue of Roman Catholic emancipation. He returned to office under Arthur Wellesley, 1st duke of Wellington, early in 1828 as home secretary and leader of the House of Commons. Differences with Wellington led to the resignation of several followers of Canning after only four months in office, which thus considerably weakened the government. This was followed by the Catholic crisis of 1828–29 that grew out of the renewal of the Irish movement for emancipation in 1823 with the formation of the Catholic Association. Its growing strength culminated in the victory of Daniel O’Connell, the Irish “Liberator,” at a by-election for County Clare in 1828. Convinced that further resistance was useless, Peel proffered his resignation and urged the prime minister to make a final settlement of the Catholic question. Faced with severe opposition from the king and the Anglican church, Wellington persuaded Peel in 1829 to remain in office and assist in carrying through the policy of concession to the Catholics on which they now both agreed. Peel was bitterly attacked for his sudden change of heart and lost his seat for Oxford. Wellington’s declaration against parliamentary reform in November 1830 finally brought about the fall of his weak and unpopular government.
