Tony Benn, original name Anthony Neil Wedgwood Benn, also called (1960–63) 2nd Viscount Stansgate of Stansgate, byname Wedgie,  (born April 3, 1925, London, England—died March 14, 2014, London), British politician, member of the Labour Party, and, from the 1970s, unofficial leader of the party’s radical populist left.
Though a fierce critic of the British class system, Benn came from a moneyed and privileged family himself. Both of his grandfathers had been members of Parliament, and his father, William Wedgwood Benn (1877–1960), had been a Liberal, and then a Labour, MP who in 1942 entered the House of Lords as 1st Viscount Stansgate. The younger Benn joined the Labour Party in 1943, served as a pilot in the Royal Air Force during World War II, attended New College, Oxford (M.A., 1949), worked as a BBC radio producer (1949–50), and was first elected to Parliament in 1950, representing Bristol South East. In 1949 Benn married American socialist Caroline DeCamp. Anticipating that inheritance of his father’s title would immediately disqualify him from continuing to serve in the House of Commons, he introduced a personal bill to permit him to renounce the title. The bill was defeated, but, after his father’s death in 1960, he continued the struggle, and in 1963 the Peerage Act enabled peers to renounce their titles for their lifetimes. Benn not only renounced his viscountcy (July 31, 1963) but later shed the names with which he had been christened, Anthony Neil Wedgwood, to become simply Tony Benn.
When Labour formed a government under Harold Wilson in 1964, Benn became postmaster general in 1964 and was minister of technology from 1966 to 1970. When Labour was in power again from 1974 to 1979 under first Wilson and then James Callaghan, Benn was secretary of state for industry and minister for posts and telecommunications (1974–75) and secretary of state for energy (1975–79).
During the 1970s he had become the most influential leftist thinker in the Labour Party. He set out his ideas in a book called Arguments for Socialism (1979). Benn believed that Britain’s consensus-based, Keynesian, managed welfare state economy had collapsed. The “democratic socialism” that he advocated would involve a large measure of public investment, public expenditure, and public ownership combined with self-management in the workplace, along with open (as opposed to secretive) government. He characterized his proposed socioeconomic model as a “home-grown British product,” distinct from both capitalism and communism. Benn also argued for Britain’s withdrawal from Northern Ireland, from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and from the European Community (later the European Union).
The “Social Contract” that Callaghan had engineered between the Labour government and the trade union leadership was obliterated by a tsunami of strikes during the 1978–79 “Winter of Discontent” and led to the election of a Conservative government under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in May 1979. Benn emerged from the resulting turmoil that divided the Labour Party in 1980 as the de facto, if unelected, leader of the party’s radical populist left. He did not contest the election for the new leader of the parliamentary Labour Party following Callaghan’s resignation in October 1980. Benn had been instrumental in persuading the Labour Party conference that month to abandon the traditional practice of having the new leader elected by Labour members of Parliament and to replace it with an electoral college system that would give a voice to grassroots party activists and trade unionists. Because he could expect greater support from the grass roots than from his fellow MPs, Benn preferred to wait for the new system to be set up before he mounted a challenge for the leadership. Indeed, those fellow MPs failed to elect Benn to the shadow cabinet in December.
A special conference was held in January 1981 to determine the exact composition of the electoral college. The new party leader, Michael Foot, was prepared to accommodate the wishes of the constituency (local) Labour parties and the trade unions, but he still hoped that the new system would reserve half the votes for MPs. After much maneuvering, the resultant electoral college—composed of 40 percent trade unionists, 30 percent local party members, and 30 percent MPs—was a glaring defeat for the parliamentary leadership and a major triumph for Benn and the reformers. A radical departure from the principle of representative parliamentary democracy, the new system was reflective of Benn’s desire to make MPs accountable to the party members and beholden to the decisions of the annual conference. Within two months prominent Labour MPs associated with the party’s right wing (including Shirley Williams, Roy Jenkins, and David Owen) left Labour to form a new political party, the Social Democratic Party.
In April Benn challenged the immensely popular right-leaning Denis Healey for deputy leadership of the party. A summer of intense ideological debate and personal rivalry followed. Healey was the early favourite, but it soon became clear that “Bennites” had established important organizational inroads in the power structure of the trade unions and had captured the support of the bulk of the local parties. Healey won in the end but by such a narrow margin (less than 1 percent) that the main effect of the contest was to highlight the strength of the left and Benn, who at that point could claim the support of half of a Labour movement that appeared to be irrevocably split.
Foot hoped that he could reunite the torn party around a shadow cabinet that could include both Benn and Healey despite sharp policy differences between them regarding nuclear weapons and the degree of socialist intervention in the economy. Benn, however, resolutely refused to compromise. He insisted that, as a member of the shadow cabinet, he would feel bound by the policy decisions of the party conference and not by the decisions of his parliamentary colleagues. In the end, Foot reluctantly disowned Benn, who failed to win election to the shadow cabinet. Nonetheless, the extent of the vote for Benn showed that, notwithstanding Foot’s disapproval, support for him was growing even among the parliamentary Labour Party.
As Thatcher pursued her market-oriented, neoliberal agenda, Labour remained deeply polarized. The party’s right wing accused Benn and the left wing of causing disaffection and desertion. Many in Labour also condemned the role of the Trotskyite faction Militant Tendency in the party. Benn refused to denounce it. His control of the party conference gave him a powerful platform from which to influence Labour’s manifesto for the 1983 general election. The 700-page A New Hope for Britain outlined a sweepingly socialist agenda that called for the renationalization of industries that had been privatized by Thatcher and for massive public investment to jump-start the stalled economy. A British electorate that largely had warmed to Thatcher’s conduct of the Falkland Islands War roundly rejected the Labour manifesto (famously characterized by one of the party’s own shadow ministers as the “longest suicide note in history”) and handed the party a crushing defeat. Many political pundits would blame the manifesto and the leftward lurch of the party under Benn’s influence for Labour’s exile from government until 1997. Benn, on the other hand, hailed the electoral result as a triumph, claiming that never before had so many British voters (more than 27 percent) endorsed a socialist program.
Although, arguably, “Bennism” would remain part of the fabric of Labour for another decade, the heyday of Benn’s influence had come and gone. To add insult to injury, Benn himself was not returned to Parliament in the 1983 election. Redistricting had eliminated the district that he had long represented in Bristol, and he failed in his attempt to win a seat representing another of the city’s districts. In 1984, however, a victory in a by-election for a seat representing Chesterfield restored Benn to Westminister. He was a prominent supporter of the National Union of Mineworkers and its radical leader Arthur Scargill in their historic 1984–85 strike, the defeat of which was a bellwether for the decline of trade unionism. For the remainder of the 1980s and throughout the 1990s, Benn was confined to Labour’s backbenches, from which he acted as a steadfast critic not only of Thatcherism but also of the centrist agenda of “New Labour” under Tony Blair.
In 2001 Benn left Parliament “in order to spend more time on politics,” and for the remainder of his life he continued to take to the ramparts to voice his radical critique of the status quo and his support for leftist activism. An indefatigable diarist from an early age, Benn produced some 20 million words chronicling his life, much of which would be published, though his writing was generally held not to be the equal of his eloquence as speaker. Once vilified by the conservative press as the “most dangerous man in Britain,” Benn, by the end of his life, was regarded by many as a pipe-smoking sage and something of a national treasure. In his final years, he summarized his personal sense of mission:
.
