William V. S. Tubman,  (born Nov. 29, 1895, Harper, Liberia—died  July 23, 1971, London, Eng.), statesman whose 27 years as Liberia’s 17th president constituted the longest tenure in that office in the history of Africa’s first republic (proclaimed in 1847). He was responsible for numerous reforms and social policies, including enactment of suffrage and property rights for all female residents of 21 or older; authorization of direct participation in government by all tribespeople, who comprise about 80 percent of the population; and the establishment of a nationwide public-school system.
A descendant of early American immigrants, mostly liberated slaves, Tubman grew up in poverty and under severe discipline. His father, a stonemason, required him and the other four children to attend daily family prayer services as well as church services and the local grade school. The children had to sleep on floor pallets because their father thought beds were too soft and therefore “degrading to character development.”
Tubman, the second son, first planned to be a preacher and was accredited, at 19, as a Methodist lay pastor. At about the same time, he received a temporary appointment as a junior collector of customs. His record of competence and honesty led him toward public service. He studied law after hours and at 23 successfully passed the bar examination.
Tubman later won election to the local legislature and then occupied a wide range of public offices, including trial judge, public prosecutor, and arbitration referee. At 35 he won election to the Liberian Senate. At Monrovia, the capital, he undertook the David-against-Goliath task of opposing the entrenched establishment—a self-perpetuating clique of American-descended Liberians who had long dominated the national government. The witty, cigar-puffing Tubman, who gaily labeled himself the “Convivial Cannibal from the Downcoast Hinterlands,” moved adroitly to advance the constitutional rights of the majority tribespeople. His maneuvers were so effective that the leadership of his party (the True Whig) proceeded to “kick him upstairs” to the Supreme Court, where he served as an associate justice until 1943. Then he unexpectedly announced his candidacy for the presidency. He won handily in the ensuing election and six times thereafter. In June 1944 Tubman and his predecessor, Edwin Barclay, were White House guests of President Franklin D. Roosevelt—the first African heads of state to be so honoured.
