Dennis Robert Hoagland,  (born April 2, 1884, Golden, Colo., U.S.—died  Sept. 5, 1949, Oakland, Calif.), American plant physiologist and authority on plant and soil interactions.
Hoagland graduated from Stanford University (1907) with a major in chemistry. In 1908 he became an instructor and assistant in the Laboratory of Animal Nutrition at the University of California at Berkeley, an institution with which he would be associated for the remainder of his life. He worked in the field of animal nutrition and biochemistry until 1912, when he entered the graduate school in the department of agricultural chemistry at the University of Wisconsin, receiving his master’s degree in 1913. The following year he became assistant professor of agricultural chemistry at Berkeley.
The United States’ dependence on German sources of potash fertilizers was brought home by the interruption of commerce during World War I. In an attempt to find substitutes, Hoagland undertook a systematic study of the inorganic and organic compounds found in the giant kelps that are so abundant on the California coast. Although his findings were not very auspicious for a new source of fertilizer, he acquired a lifelong interest in the absorption and accumulation of ions by plants, a field that eventually won him world renown. The remarkable ability of kelps to absorb elements from seawater selectively and to accumulate potassium and iodide many times in excess of the concentrations found in seawater deeply impressed Hoagland. He developed scientific techniques for growing plants under rigidly controlled experimental conditions that would permit the identification and isolation of individual variables. His water-culture techniques for growing plants led him to develop a culture solution now universally known as Hoagland’s solution.
Hoagland discovered that ion absorption is not a simple mechanical matter of permeability but is a metabolic process requiring the expenditure of energy. His work on mineral deficiencies in crop plants showed that several “diseases” of California crops were actually a manifestation of insufficient supplies of such elements as zinc. His early research on the effect of hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) on the growth of plants provided much useful information.
In recognition of his many discoveries, the American Society of Plant Physiologists elected him as president and awarded him the first Stephen Hales Prize (1930).
