Mario Batali, in full Mario Francesco Batali,  (born September 19, 1960, Seattle, Washington, U.S.), American chef, television personality, author, and restaurateur who was one of the most well-known food celebrities of the early 21st century.
Batali developed a passion for cooking while growing up surrounded by accomplished home cooks in his family, particularly during visits to his grandmother’s house in Seattle, where he was immersed in traditional Italian cuisine. After graduating from Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, in 1982, he enrolled at Le Cordon Bleu cooking school in London, but he quickly withdrew and instead apprenticed under soon-to-be-famed London chef Marco Pierre White. Batali worked in a series of kitchens in Europe and in the United States before he moved in 1989 to a small northern Italian village, where he spent three years learning the nuances of traditional Italian cuisine.
In 1993 Batali and partner Steve Crane opened Pó, a small trattoria in New York City. Five years later he began a fruitful partnership with restaurateur Joe Bastianich (with whom Batali would later open more than a dozen additional restaurants around the world as part of the Batali & Bastianich Hospitality Group [B&BHG]) when the two opened New York City’s Babbo Ristorante e Enoteca, Batali’s signature restaurant; the James Beard Foundation named it the best new American restaurant of 1998. While his star was rising in the culinary world, he gained much more fame via his appearances on televised cooking programs. The gregarious Batali’s first foray into television was Molto Mario (1996–2004), where he would typically cook for three guests seated alongside his kitchen while regaling them with stories about the history and culture of Italian food. His idiosyncratic appearance—the heavyset, bearded Batali kept his long red hair in a ponytail and almost always wore shorts and bright orange molded clogs—helped him stand out among the dozens of television personalities who rose to prominence with the popularization of food-based programming in the 1990s and early 2000s. Batali’s other notable television appearances included the cooking competition Iron Chef America, where he was one of the program’s original Iron Chefs from 2005 until his departure from the show in 2009; Spain…on the Road Again (2008), a travelogue of the titular country that featured Batali and a group of his celebrity friends; and the daytime talk and cooking show The Chew (2011–17).
In 2005 Batali was named outstanding chef of the year by the Beard Foundation. That same year he opened the upscale Del Posto in New York’s trendy meatpacking district, which later joined Babbo as one of the two Batali restaurants to receive a star rating from the prestigious Michelin Guide. He and Bastianich shared the Beard Foundation’s best restaurateur award in 2008. In 2010 Batali helped open a New York outpost of Eataly, a chain (based in Turin, Italy) of massive stores that contain groceries and a number of Italian restaurants under one roof. He also was involved with the 2013 opening of an Eataly store in Chicago.
Batali’s numerous cookbooks included The Babbo Cookbook (2002), Molto Italiano: 327 Simple Italian Recipes to Cook at Home (2005), Molto Batali: Simple Family Meals from My Home to Yours (2011), America: Farm to Table (2014; cowritten with Jim Webster), and Big American Cookbook: 250 Favorite Recipes from Across the USA (2016). He was also profiled in Bill Buford’s Heat (2006), which follows Buford as he tries his hand as an amateur chef in Babbo’s kitchen.
In December 2017 Batali was accused of sexual harassment by multiple workers at his restaurants. He subsequently apologized for his behaviour and stepped down from B&BHG. That month he was also fired from the TV show The Chew, and a number of stores stopped carrying his products. In 2019 Batali sold his stake in B&BHG, and later that year he was arraigned on charges of assault and battery for a 2017 incident at a Boston restaurant. He pled not guilty. In addition, in 2020 it was announced that New York’s attorney general was investigating the sexual harassment allegations. The investigation concluded the following year, with a finding that Batali and Bastianich had violated state and city human rights laws. A deal was reached that included a financial settlement for the victims.
