Paula Deen, née Paula Ann Hiers,  (born January 19, 1947, Albany, Georgia, U.S.), American chef who popularized the cuisine of the American South through restaurants, cookbooks, and television programs. Aside from her culinary creations, her appeal lay largely in her rags-to-riches story, her distinctive Southern accent, and her warm and welcoming public persona.
Deen grew up in southwestern Georgia, not far from the site where her ancestors had operated a cotton plantation in the mid-19th century. She spent her early childhood at a small resort owned by her maternal grandparents, but she left at age six, when her parents purchased a gas station and souvenir shop in Albany and the family moved into the back of the shop. Deen remained close to her grandparents, however, and it was from her grandmother that she learned the style of cooking that would eventually make her famous.
Shortly after Deen graduated from Albany High School in 1965, she married her high-school sweetheart, Jimmy Deen (divorced 1989). Her father died in 1966 and her mother four years later. In addition to the challenge of raising two young boys, cumulative adversity—including being robbed at gunpoint while working as a bank teller—were overwhelming for Deen, and she became psychologically unstable, experiencing frequent panic attacks and increasingly debilitating bouts of agoraphobia. After moving to Savannah in 1987, she recovered enough to secure a job in a hospital. To supplement her meagre income, in 1989 she launched The Bag Lady, a side business making “lunch and love in a bag” for her colleagues at the hospital.
Deen’s lunch business expanded, and by 1991 she had opened a sit-down restaurant at a Savannah hotel. The restaurant, called The Lady, flourished, and in 1996 she moved it to a larger space. The restaurant reopened as The Lady & Sons, marking the integral role that Deen’s two boys played in the operation. The Lady & Sons quickly developed a large and dedicated customer base, which prompted Deen to publish The Lady & Sons Savannah Country Cookbook (1998), a compilation of some of her favourite recipes.
Release of the cookbook catalyzed Deen’s rise as a celebrity chef. Marketed through a home-shopping television channel, it sold nearly 70,000 copies in just one day and ultimately led to the 2002 premiere of Paula’s Home Cooking, Deen’s own cable-television show on the Food Network. Viewers were captivated as much by Deen’s unsophisticated and self-deprecating sense of humour, her nonjudgmental attitude, and her all-around rustic charm as they were by her cooking, and the show not only shot to the top in the network’s ratings but also earned Deen an Emmy Award in 2007 for outstanding lifestyle host. The success of Paula’s Home Cooking led Deen to create and host two more cooking shows for the Food Network: Paula’s Party (2006–08) and Paula’s Best Dishes (2008–13).
When she was not on camera, Deen continued to publish cookbooks, open restaurants, and diversify her business. By 2012 she had released more than a dozen cookbooks, had launched the magazine Cooking with Paula Deen, and had published her life story, Paula Deen: It Ain’t All About the Cookin’ (2007; with Sherry Suib Cohen), which became a New York Times best seller. She also opened a number of restaurants at casinos across the country and developed lines of kitchenware and food products.
Throughout her career Deen was recognized as a maven of sugar- and fat-laden comfort foods, among the most notorious of which was a hamburger topped with a fried egg and bacon, sandwiched between two glazed doughnuts. Consequently, she became the target of some sharp criticism when she announced in 2012 that she had been diagnosed with type II diabetes. Neither her condition nor the criticism did much to change her culinary ways, however. She addressed her illness mostly through medication and moderation.
Deen drew even more pointed criticism in 2013, when, in the course of a lawsuit filed by a former employee, she confessed to using racist language, condoning derogatory humour, and allowing pornography at her place of business. The lawsuit made numerous allegations against Deen and Bubba Hiers, her brother; a judge later dismissed the racial discrimination claims, ruling that the former employee did not have legal standing to sue. Although Deen posted a lengthy and effusive apology on the YouTube video-sharing Web site, the Food Network announced that it would not renew her contract after June of that year.
Deen subsequently looked to rehabilitate her public image. In 2015 she appeared as a contestant on the popular television series Dancing with the Stars and released the cookbook Paula Deen Cuts the Fat: 250 Favorite Recipes All Lightened Up (written with Melissa Clark). In 2016 she debuted a new TV show, Positively Paula, which included cooking and interviews; it aired on various cable channels. That year she also unveiled a clothing line. Though Positively Paula lasted only one season, Deen continued her comeback with the release of the cookbook Paula Deen’s Southern Baking (2019).
