Aquaman,  American comic strip superhero, defender of the underwater kingdom of Atlantis, and sometime member of the superhero consortium Justice League of America. Aquaman made his debut in 1941 in the anthology series More Fun Comics and since that time has appeared in numerous DC Comics magazines.
Although Aquaman’s origin and even identity have been revised several times over the decades, in most iterations he possesses superhuman strength, the ability to breathe underwater, and the capacity to communicate telepathically with creatures of the sea, among other powers. He has curly blond hair and usually wears skintight clothing that includes a scaly orange shirt and green pants and gloves. For most of his career, he has been the monarch of Atlantis. The best-known version of Aquaman, developed in the “Silver Age” of comic books in the 1950s and ’60s, is the son of a lighthouse keeper and an Atlantean outcast. In 1964 he became one of the first superheroes to get married when he wed the undersea queen Mera. His nemeses include the supervillain Black Manta, who murdered one of Aquaman’s sons, and Ocean Master, who is also Aquaman’s half-brother Orm.
The first story featuring Aquaman was written by Mort Weisinger, who likely created the character, and illustrated by Paul Norris. Weisinger, a former science fiction editor, is better known as the creator of Superman. Norris’s career included updating the look of DC’s Sandman series and working with Hanna-Barbera, drawing such figures as Yogi Bear and Scooby-Doo.
In the Silver Age, artist Ramona Fradon helped define Aquaman’s iconic appearance. In the later “Modern Age” of comics (mid-1980s to the present), writers such as Peter David, Keith Giffen, Kurt Busiek, and Kelly Sue DeConnick adapted and redefined Aquaman for new generations of readers.
Aquaman starred in animated television shows in 1967 and ’68 and in numerous animated versions of Super Friends starting in 1973. He also appeared as a character in the live-action television drama Smallville (2001) and as the featured character in the made-for-TV movie Aquaman (2006). Jason Momoa portrayed Aquaman in Justice League (2017), the character’s feature film debut. Momoa reprised the role for Aquaman (2018), a film that met generally positive reviews and, with more than $1.1 billion in earnings globally, nearly doubled Justice League’s anemic box office performance.
