Batwoman,  American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics to serve as a strong female counterpart to Batman.
The original Batwoman, Kathy Kane, made her debut in Detective Comics no. 233 (July 1956). She was to serve as a female romantic interest for Batman, thereby countering the charge made by Frederic Wertham in his book Seduction of the Innocent (1954) that Batman and his teen sidekick Robin were promoting a gay lifestyle. According to the first version of her origin, Kathy Kane is a rich heiress with an unusual background as a former circus performer. She decides to use her athletic skills to become a costumed crime fighter in imitation of Batman, and she eventually becomes a frequent ally of Batman and Robin. In 1961 Kathy’s niece, Betty Kane, became Batwoman’s sidekick, Bat-Girl. Thus Robin was given a romantic interest as well.
When DC Comics editor Julius Schwartz took charge of Batman and Detective Comics in 1964, he dropped Batwoman and Bat-Girl from the series. Two years later he presided over the creation of Barbara Gordon, the new Batgirl (without the hyphen in her name), thus creating what was widely regarded as the definitive version of that character. Eventually, Batwoman emerged from retirement in 1979, only to be killed that same year by Batman’s foes, the League of Assassins.
Decades later, DC Comics introduced a new Batwoman, Kate Kane, who made her first appearance in issue no. 7 of the yearlong series 52 (July 2006). Artist Alex Ross designed the new Batwoman’s costume, which was boldly contemporary. Attitudes in American society had changed tremendously in the half century since the first Batwoman’s debut. Whereas the original Batwoman was created partially to show that Batman was not gay, DC Comics presented the new Batwoman as a lesbian from her very first appearance, and she was portrayed as having been in a long-term relationship with Gotham City police detective Renee Montoya. The new Batwoman appeared as the lead character in a 10-issue Detective Comics run beginning in June 2009, and she received her own ongoing comic book series in 2011. The title was greeted with critical acclaim and was widely embraced by fans of the Batman franchise, thanks to strong storytelling by writer Greg Rucka and the revolutionary artwork of J.H. Williams III. Williams, who had previously worked on Alan Moore’s genre-bending Promethea, redefined the visual expectations of a monthly superhero book with bold pencil work and innovative page layouts that were complex without looking cluttered.
