Brenda Starr,  fictional newspaper-reporter heroine of Brenda Starr, a comic strip created by Dale Messick that ran from 1940 to 2011. It first appeared as a Sunday feature of the Chicago Tribune. Brenda Starr, distributed through Joseph Medill Patterson’s Chicago Tribune–New York News Syndicate, became a daily feature in 1945 but, because Patterson disliked the strip, was not published in the New York News until after his death (1946). Messick adopted the androgynous first name Dale because of antifemale prejudice in the comics industry. Although she envisioned her strip heroine as a female bandit, Messick changed the occupation to that of newspaper reporter on the advice of Patterson’s editorial assistant, Mollie Slott, who also helped name the character: Brenda, after Brenda Frazier, a well-known debutante of the time, and Starr, reflecting Brenda’s status as a star reporter.
Brenda Starr was a glamorous, beautifully dressed and coiffed reporter who traveled the world on assignment for her newspaper, The Flash. Brenda’s romances dominated the action in the strip. Independent and feisty, she was pursued by many men, but her heart belonged to her elusive lover, Basil St. John, a mystery man who raised black orchids, an ingredient in the only antidote for his unnamed illness. Although it appeared unlikely that Brenda and Basil would ever marry, they were finally wed after a courtship of 36 years. Hank O’Hair, a female colleague, and Mr. Livwright, Brenda’s irascible managing editor, appeared frequently in the strip.
Messick retired from the daily comic strip in 1980, but she continued to submit scripts to a rotating team of writers and artists for the next three years. In 1985 Chicago Tribune columnist Mary Schmich took on full-time writing duties, and she was joined by artists Ramona Fradon (1985–95) and June Brigman (1995–2011). Schmich and Brigman concluded their run on Brenda Starr in January 2011, and the final strip featured Brenda leaving her reporting job at The Flash. Throughout the strip’s 71-year run, it was always written and illustrated by women.
The film serial Brenda Starr, Reporter (1945) featured Joan Woodbury. Jill St. John portrayed the heroine in a television film (1976), and Brooke Shields brought the character back to the silver screen in Brenda Starr (1989).
