Bugs Bunny,  cartoon rabbit created by Warner Brothers as part of its Looney Tunes animated short film series. Emerging as one of the biggest stars of the so-called golden age of American animation (1928–c. 1960), Bugs Bunny has endured as one of the world’s most popular cartoon characters.
Bugs Bunny was conceived at Leon Schlesinger’s animation unit at Warner Brothers studios. Nicknamed “Termite Terrace” because of its spartan accommodations on the Warner lot, the unit boasted some of the top names in animation, including Tex Avery, Chuck Jones, Bob Clampett, and Friz Freleng, as well as renowned voice artist Mel Blanc and musician Carl Stalling. Bugs Bunny was the product of combined inspiration. Animator Ben (“Bugs”) Hardaway inadvertently christened him when his casual sketch of a proposed rabbit character was labeled “Bugs’s Bunny” by a fellow employee. Robert McKimson drew the model sheet for the character, Freleng developed Bugs’s personality, Avery and Jones made further refinements, and Blanc infused him with his familiar wisecracking Brooklynese delivery. Embryonic versions of the character appeared in Warner cartoons as early as 1938, but not until A Wild Hare (1940) did Bugs appear in his familiar incarnation.
Only Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse rivals Bugs Bunny as the most popular cartoon character of all time. Unlike Mickey’s indistinct everyman persona, however, Bugs is shrewd, irreverent, quick-witted, and outspoken and has a strong predisposition for carrots, practical jokes, and catchphrases such as “What’s up, Doc?” “Of course, you know, this means war!” and “What a maroon!” He occasionally appears with other animated protagonists such as Daffy Duck and Porky Pig, and his most frequent nemeses are Elmer Fudd and Yosemite Sam. Classic Bugs cartoons include Hare Tonic (1945), The Big Snooze (1946), Hair-Raising Hare (1946), Buccaneer Bunny (1948), Mississippi Hare (1949), Mutiny on the Bunny (1950), What’s Up, Doc? (1950), The Rabbit of Seville (1950), and the Oscar-winning Knighty-Knight Bugs (1958). What’s Opera, Doc? (1957)—an animated masterpiece which cast Bugs and Elmer Fudd in the roles of Brunhild and Siegfried in a hilariously tweaked adaptation of Richard Wagner’s The Ring of the Nibelung—was the first cartoon short to be inducted into the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress in 1992.
When Warner Brothers discontinued its production of cartoon shorts for theatres in 1963, Bugs Bunny continued to appear in television commercials and feature-length compilations of classic shorts such as The Looney Looney Looney Bugs Bunny Movie (1981) and 1,001 Rabbit Tales (1982). He reappeared in the feature films Who Framed Roger Rabbit? (1988), Space Jam (1996), and Space Jam: A New Legacy (2021). His likeness is marketed extensively on commercial products.
