Captain Marvel,  American comic strip superhero created by writer Stan Lee and artist Gene Colan for Marvel Comics. The character debuted in Marvel Super-Heroes no. 12 in December 1967. The role of Captain Marvel would be filled by many heroes over subsequent years, most notably by the Kree warrior Mar-Vell and U.S. Air Force officer Carol Danvers.
The first comic strip character with the name Captain Marvel appeared in late 1939 in Whiz Comics no. 2 (cover date February 1940). Writer Bill Parker and artist C.C. Beck created the superhero for Fawcett Comics in an effort to capitalize on the blockbuster success of DC Comics’ Superman, who had debuted the previous year. Fawcett’s Captain Marvel was a young boy named Billy Batson, who upon speaking the magic word Shazam! could transform himself into “Earth’s mightiest mortal.” Shazam was the name of the wizard who had granted Billy this amazing ability, as well as an acronym that defined Captain Marvel’s powers (the wisdom of Solomon, the strength of Hercules, the stamina of Atlas, the power of Zeus, the courage of Achilles, and the speed of Mercury). Captain Marvel would eventually rival and even surpass Superman in popularity, and DC changed their hero accordingly. Prior to Captain Marvel, Superman could “leap tall buildings in a single bound,” but “the speed of Mercury” granted Captain Marvel the power of flight, and soon the Man of Steel was taking to the skies as well. The whimsical storytelling of writer Otto Binder was complemented by Beck’s clean dynamic penciling, and Captain Marvel would remain one of the best-selling titles of the Golden Age of comics (1938–c. 1950). Not content to play catch-up, DC filed suit against Fawcett for copyright infringement. The legal battle over Captain Marvel dragged on for more than a decade, and, with the sales of superhero comics sharply declining in the early 1950s, Fawcett opted to settle the suit and cease publication of Captain Marvel books.
The Captain Marvel name lay dormant until February 1966, when pulp magazine magnate Myron Fass published Captain Marvel, a title widely regarded as one of the worst comic books ever written. Fass’s Captain Marvel was released at a time when Marvel Comics was riding a wave of popularity with hits like Fantastic Four, Spider-Man, and X-Men. It seems obvious that he was hoping to claim the trademark and exploit any perceived connection with the Marvel brand. This conclusion is supported by Fass’s unauthorized use of well-known DC character names, such as Plastic Man, Dr. Fate, and “the Bat” (a poorly disguised Batman clone), as well as his appropriation of Billy Batson, the Fawcett Captain Marvel’s alter ego, for his Captain Marvel’s sidekick, Billy Baxton. Captain Marvel disappeared from newsstands after just a handful of issues, and Marvel Comics, recognizing that low-quality imitators could do lasting damage to their brand, moved to secure the Captain Marvel name. In July 1966 Marvel publisher Martin Goodman offered Fass $6,000 for the trademark, but Fass refused. Marvel went ahead with plans to introduce their own character, and in October 1966 Captain Marvel appeared on the cover of Marvel Super-Heroes no. 12 (cover date December 1967). Fass responded by suing Marvel for trademark infringement, but he ultimately settled for $4,500, adding that his Captain Marvel “was selling lousy, anyway.”
In 1972 DC obtained a license to use Fawcett’s superheroes, and Shazam! no. 1 (February 1973) announced the return of “the ORIGINAL Captain Marvel.” That claim would appear in the book’s masthead for a little over a year, until Marvel challenged it on the basis of their copyright. Fawcett’s Captain Marvel soon appeared in the live-action television series Shazam! (1974–77). Over subsequent decades, DC continued to publish the adventures of Captain Marvel and the Marvel Family (Mary Marvel, Captain Marvel, Jr., Uncle Marvel, and debonair anthropomorphic tiger Tawky Tawny), and by 1991 DC had formally purchased the entire Fawcett comics line. Although purists continued to refer to the character as Captain Marvel, DC officially changed the moniker of “Earth’s mightiest mortal” to Shazam in 2012. Zachary Levi portrayed the title character in Shazam! (2019), a comedic take on the character’s origin story. The film’s bright colours and generally optimistic tone made it something of an outlier in DC’s dour big-screen universe.
The Captain Marvel who debuted in Marvel Super-Heroes no. 12 was a space captain of the alien Kree race. Known as Mar-Vell to his people, this Captain Marvel was sent to Earth as part of a convoluted plot by the Supreme Intelligence, the leader of the Kree, to genetically advance the Kree and to neutralize the threat of Earth’s superhero community. Mar-Vell was a member of the human-looking “pink” Kree, and he was treated with jealousy and suspicion by the members of the blue-skinned Kree nobility. Chief among this group was Ronan the Accuser, a hammer-wielding defender of the doctrine of Kree racial superiority and military supremacy and a recurring antagonist for Mar-Vell.
Writer Roy Thomas took over scripting duties from Stan Lee with Marvel Super-Heroes no. 13, and he continued in that role, with Gene Colan as artist, for Captain Marvel no. 1 (May 1968). Under Thomas, Mar-Vell’s mission took him to Cape Canaveral, where he made the acquaintance of base security officer Carol Danvers and did battle with a massive Kree Sentry robot. Already, Mar-Vell was deviating from the plans laid by his Kree superiors, but “cosmic threat turned hero who battles against his former master” was a niche that Marvel Comics had amply filled with the Silver Surfer in the pages of Fantastic Four.
Mar-Vell was created by the editorial necessity of a trademark claim, and his early stories reflected that the writers of the Marvel Comics “House of Ideas” had little enthusiasm for the character. This can be seen in the next stage of Mar-Vell’s development, which resulted in a superhero that was suspiciously reminiscent of Captain Marvel’s Fawcett namesake. Mar-Vell had initially possessed few notable superhuman abilities, but he was given greatly enhanced strength and endurance as well as the power of flight. Artist Gil Kane redesigned Mar-Vell’s costume, which was previously a green and white Kree military uniform. The costume that debuted in Captain Marvel no. 17 (October 1969) was predominantly red, with a yellow starburst logo on the chest and gold wristbands (the Fawcett Captain Marvel’s costume was also predominantly red, but with a yellow lightning bolt on the chest and gold wristbands). After becoming trapped in an extradimensional limbo known as the Negative Zone, Mar-Vell learned that he could free himself by trading bodies with Rick Jones, a teenager who had a long association with the Incredible Hulk and the Avengers. When Jones struck together the Nega-Bands, the gold wristbands that had appeared with Mar-Vell’s new costume, he assumed Mar-Vell’s place in the Negative Zone and Mar-Vell emerged. The sound effect “KTANG!” effectively took the place of a spoken “Shazam!” to trigger the transformation.
Fans greeted these changes with indifference, and mediocre sales kept Captain Marvel on the verge of cancellation. Jim Starlin breathed new life into the book when he joined Captain Marvel as lead artist on issue no. 25 (March 1973). He assumed writing duties over subsequent issues, and Starlin would do much to expand the cosmic Marvel Universe beyond the foundations laid by legendary comic creator Jack Kirby. One of Starlin’s key contributions was the introduction of the mad demigod Thanos, and the intergalactic conflict between Thanos and Mar-Vell characterized much of Starlin’s run on Captain Marvel.
In spite of this focus on cosmic adventures, the biggest lasting change to Mar-Vell occurred as the result of a brush with a minor Earth supervillain called Nitro in Captain Marvel no. 34 (September 1974). In one of the final issues of Starlin’s tenure on the title, Mar-Vell was exposed to poisonous gas in an explosion caused by Nitro, and he eventually developed symptoms of “Blackend,” the Kree term for lung cancer. Captain Marvel would continue under a variety of writers through the 1970s until the series was cancelled with issue no. 62 (May 1979). Starlin returned to chronicle Mar-Vell’s final days in The Death of Captain Marvel (1982), Marvel Comics’ first foray into the graphic novel format. From the time of Mar-Vell’s creation at the behest of Marvel publisher Martin Goodman, writers had struggled to find a role for the Kree hero in the broader Marvel Universe. In death, Mar-Vell found that place, and Starlin’s poignant depiction of the event served as a hallmark in Marvel Comics history. Although later writers would “resurrect” Mar-Vell from time to time, the relative permanence of Mar-Vell’s death remained something of an outlier in superhero comics.
Carol Danvers made her first appearance in Marvel Super-Heroes no. 13 (March 1968), and she soon became embroiled in Mar-Vell’s adventures. After Danvers was abducted by a jealous Kree officer named Yon-Rogg, Mar-Vell flew to her rescue in Captain Marvel no. 18 (November 1969). During the ensuing battle between Mar-Vell and Yon-Rogg, an ancient Kree device called the Psyche-Magnitron exploded, bathing Mar-Vell and Danvers in radiation. The explosion triggered a transformation in Danvers, infusing her with Kree DNA and granting her powers similar to those of Mar-Vell.
These developments were not revealed for the better part of a decade, however, as Danvers ceased to be a regular presence in the Captain Marvel series. With the second wave of feminism cresting in the 1970s and DC icon Wonder Woman appearing on the cover of the debut issue of Ms. magazine in 1972, it was becoming increasingly obvious that Marvel lacked a similar high-profile female hero. The first issue of Ms. Marvel (January 1977) saw Danvers, now sporting a distinctive Farrah Fawcett hairdo, travel to New York City to begin a career as a journalist for Woman, a magazine published by Spider-Man antagonist J. Jonah Jameson. In these early appearances, Danvers and Ms. Marvel were essentially separate individuals, and Danvers experienced blackouts whenever she transformed into her superheroic persona. With Ms. Marvel no. 3 (March 1977), X-Men writer Chris Claremont took over the title, and he began integrating the two personalities.
Claremont had used melodramatic soap opera conventions to great effect in X-Men, but similar strategies brought diminishing returns in Ms. Marvel. Each month, Danvers dealt with stress at work while Ms. Marvel struggled to defeat forgettable villains, and a rotating cast of artists meant that Ms. Marvel never achieved a consistent look. A new costume was unveiled in Ms. Marvel no. 20 (October 1978), but the book had struggled to find an audience throughout its run, and it was cancelled with issue no. 23 (April 1979).
Ms. Marvel promptly joined Marvel’s premiere supergroup in The Avengers no. 183 (May 1979), but her association with that team ran the gamut from unfortunate to horrifying. In The Avengers no. 200 (October 1980), Danvers gave birth, but she had no recollection of becoming pregnant and had no idea who the father might be. After the child was born, he aged at an accelerated rate and revealed that he was Marcus, the son of the Avengers’ time-traveling foe Immortus. He had engineered his own birth by kidnapping Danvers and raping her while she was under the influence of Immortus’s mind-control devices. In an inexplicable turn, Danvers quit the Avengers and agreed to accompany her “child” Marcus back to his home dimension.
Claremont recognized that this story was an enormous step backward for Ms. Marvel as well as for the portrayal of women in comics, and, in The Avengers Annual no. 10 (October 1981), he attempted to rectify the matter. Danvers, who had made her way back to Earth, was attacked by the power-stealing mutant Rogue, and she lost all of her memories as well as her Ms. Marvel abilities. Claremont made Danvers into a blank slate. After recovering some of her memories, Danvers chastised the Avengers for allowing her to leave with Marcus while she was obviously under his mental control. From this point, Claremont effectively asserted ownership of the character by having Danvers recuperate with the X-Men, a franchise that he oversaw for nearly two decades.
Danvers did not remain without superpowers for long. In The Uncanny X-Men no. 164 (December 1982), experimentation on her by an alien race known as the Brood unlocked an array of cosmic abilities, and she adopted the name Binary. Danvers became disenchanted with the X-Men after they admitted Rogue as a member, and she joined a band of spacefaring pirates called the Starjammers. Danvers spent the remainder of the 1980s and ’90s making sporadic guest appearances in a variety of Marvel titles before returning to the Avengers in The Avengers vol. 3, no. 4 (May 1998), and adopting the name Warbird. Her second tenure with the Avengers would prove almost as disastrous as the first, as Danvers struggled with alcoholism and her life spiraled out of control. She was once again relegated to a backup role in the stories of other heroes.
With Mar-Vell dead and Danvers operating under a series of new names, Marvel needed a new avenue to continue their claim on the Captain Marvel trademark. In The Amazing Spider-Man Annual, vol. 1, no. 16 (October 1982), a new Captain Marvel made her debut. Monica Rambeau was a New Orleans police officer who gained energy manipulation powers after being caught in the explosion of an experimental device. As Captain Marvel, Rambeau was the first African American woman to join the Avengers, and she was eventually elected leader of the team in The Avengers no. 279 (May 1987). For the next decade, Rambeau made regular appearances in The Avengers and throughout the Marvel Comics line. In Avengers Unplugged no. 5 (June 1996), she surrendered the mantle of Captain Marvel to Mar-Vell’s son Genis-Vell (who would, in turn, pass it on to his sister Phyla-Vell). Rambeau subsequently adopted the names Photon, Pulsar, and Spectrum. This inconstancy was a reflection of Marvel’s general ambivalence toward the character. That attitude was exploited brilliantly by writer Warren Ellis and artist Stuart Immonen when they cast Rambeau as “Auntie Monica,” the leader of a team of misfits and castoffs in the critically lauded Nextwave: Agents of H.A.T.E. (2006–07).
Around this time, Carol Danvers returned to the foreground and reclaimed her original name for Ms. Marvel (2006–10). Danvers played a central role in the massive Secret Invasion and Civil War comic book crossover events, and, when writer Kelly Sue DeConnick and artist Dexter Soy relaunched Captain Marvel in July 2012, it was with Danvers in the title role. DeConnick did much to flesh out Danvers’s backstory, and Captain Marvel soon became the most prominent female hero in the Marvel Universe. In addition to her own ongoing solo series, Captain Marvel appeared in the The Avengers and in A-Force (2015–16), and she was featured alongside Monica Rambeau (as Spectrum) in The Ultimates (2015–16).
With the Marvel Cinematic Universe growing into one of the most successful film franchises of all time, it seemed inevitable that Captain Marvel would transition to the big screen. That move was teased at the conclusion of Avengers: Infinity War (2018), and Brie Larson was cast in the title role of Captain Marvel, which was released in March 2019. The film was an unqualified blockbuster, grossing more than $1 billion worldwide, and Larson reprised the role for Avengers: Endgame (2019).
With Danvers becoming Captain Marvel, the time was ripe for a new Ms. Marvel to emerge. After cameo appearances in several issues of Captain Marvel, Pakistani American teenager Kamala Khan was unveiled as the new Ms. Marvel in All-New Marvel Now! Point One no. 1 (January 2014). Writer G. Willow Wilson and artist Adrian Alphona revealed the character’s origins in Ms. Marvel no. 1 (February 2014). Khan’s powers, which included the ability to stretch and “embiggen,” were awakened by the Terrigen Bomb, a device that triggered latent Inhuman abilities in individuals around the globe. Khan fashioned a costume from a burkini and began fighting crime in her home town of Jersey City, New Jersey. The book was an enormous hit. Khan’s attempts to integrate superheroics into her life as an observant Muslim teenager struck a chord with the young adult market, and Ms. Marvel no. 1 was the first Marvel title to sell more copies as a digital download than as a print edition. While continuing in her own highly rated solo title, Khan also appeared as a member of the Avengers before joining the teen supergroup the Champions.
