Green Arrow,  American comic strip superhero created for DC Comics by writer Mort Weisinger and artist George Papp. Nicknamed the “Emerald Archer” for his Robin Hood-like appearance and manner, the character first appeared in More Fun Comics no. 73 (November 1941).
From the start, Green Arrow was an attempt to replicate one of DC’s biggest successes—Batman. After being shipwrecked on a desert island, wealthy playboy Oliver Queen makes himself a bow and arrows and trains himself to become an expert with them. Whereas Batman could draw from a vast array of items on his utility belt, Green Arrow had an almost inexhaustible supply of trick arrows. After saving a ship that anchors offshore, Queen returns to civilization and embarks on a career as a crime fighter. Teaming up with a Robin-like sidekick named Speedy, Green Arrow became a regular feature in titles such as Adventure Comics and World’s Finest Comics. Throughout World War II, Green Arrow and Speedy also served as members of the Seven Soldiers of Victory in Leading Comics. The duo fought minor villains like the Wizard, Clock King, and the Rainbow Archer throughout the 1940s and ’50s, but the superhero boom that marked the dawn of the Silver Age of comics in the early 1960s passed them by. By the late ’60s, however, Green Arrow and Speedy were to become among the most talked-about heroes in comics.
In late 1969 artist Neal Adams and writer Denny O’Neil dramatically redefined the character. Sporting a new costume and goatee beard and relieved of his fortune by a crooked business partner, Green Arrow was now a crusader against social injustice. Queen moved to the inner city and met the Black Canary, who would become his love interest for the next few decades. He co-headlined with Green Lantern in a series of comics by O’Neil and Adams that tackled such issues as race relations, ecology, politics, business corruption, and drugs. The award-winning run generated vast amounts of publicity, and readers embraced an older Oliver Queen—passionate, belligerent, hotheaded, and radical. Here was a character that had gone from a one-dimensional cipher to an embodiment of the zeitgeist, equal parts hippie, hero, and rabble-rouser. Meanwhile, Speedy personified the era’s darker side as he descended into drug addiction in the widely praised Green Lantern/Green Arrow issues no. 85 and 86.
Despite the critical praise, the Green Lantern/Green Arrow partnership was relatively short-lived, and the archer was relegated to guest appearances throughout the remainder of the 1970s. Wisecracks replaced the rhetoric of the Adams and O’Neil years, and the character’s rough edges were smoothed by later writers. Green Arrow was given his first solo comic in 1983, but much more significant was Mike Grell’s hard-hitting Green Arrow: The Longbow Hunters (1987) limited series. The following year, The Longbow Hunters story was continued as Green Arrow, volume 2, an ongoing title that was intended for mature readers because of its grim, violent tone. As part of its wide-ranging Zero Hour event in the mid-1990s, Queen was killed in an airplane explosion, and his son, Connor, became a new, more youthful Green Arrow. Queen was later resurrected, reclaimed the mantle of Green Arrow, and eventually married Black Canary. Their happiness was short-lived, however. Green Arrow responded to the destruction of his hometown of Star City by killing the supervillain who was responsible for the act, and Black Canary ended their relationship. When DC rebooted its entire comic universe in 2011, Green Arrow once again received his own title, but fan and critical response to the latest incarnation of the Emerald Archer was mixed at best.
Inspired by the success of Smallville, a long-running television series that chronicled the adventures of a young Superman, the CW network premiered Arrow in 2012. The series revisited the Green Arrow’s Golden Age origin and focused on his early years as a crime fighter in Star City.
