Iron Fist,  American comic strip superhero created for Marvel Comics by writer Roy Thomas and artist Gil Kane. The crime-fighting martial artist first appeared in Marvel Premiere no. 15 (May 1974).
Daniel Rand, who would become known as the Iron Fist, is orphaned at the age of nine when his parents are killed while the family is searching for the legendary Himalayan city of K’un-L’un. Near death, Rand reaches the gates of the city and is taken in by Lei Kung the Thunderer, a teacher who spends the next decade training him in all aspects of the martial arts. At the age of 19, Rand undergoes his coming-of-age ritual by slaying Shou-Lao the Undying, a powerful dragon. The victory leaves Rand with a stylized black dragon tattoo emblazoned across his chest, and he is recognized as the Iron Fist, a title granted to the defender of K’un-L’un. As a “living weapon,” Rand can focus his spirit energy to achieve a number of superhuman effects. Most often, Rand directs this power into his hands, rendering him capable of delivering devastating blows that crackle with mystic energy. Using the power of the Iron Fist initially leaves Rand exhausted, but he grows more adept and efficient at channeling his spiritual reserves. Rand later leaves K’un-L’un for New York City and takes over his late father’s position controlling the Rand Corporation. He soon crosses paths with female adventurer (and future long-term romantic interest) Misty Knight.
After a successful run in Marvel Premiere, Rand got his own title with the debut of Iron Fist volume 1, no. 1 (November 1975), written by Chris Claremont and drawn by John Byrne. Iron Fist was cancelled after just 15 issues, but Rand soon partnered with the street-level hero Luke Cage in the ongoing series Power Man and Iron Fist.
Working together, Cage (using the superheroic moniker Power Man) and Iron Fist establish a business venture called Heroes for Hire, Inc., and their disparate temperaments—Rand’s reserved wisdom and Cage’s mercurial anger—prove to complement each other well. Despite their contrasts, which were occasionally played for laughs, both heroes were united by a keen sense of conscience. This led to a tendency to place ethics above profits: they frequently worked for free, although both were in high demand as detectives and bodyguards.
Power Man and Iron Fist concluded with issue no. 125 (September 1986) and the apparent demise of Iron Fist. The dead Iron Fist is later revealed to have been an impostor, while the real Rand is imprisoned in K’un-L’un. Lei Kung joins forces with the Sub-Mariner and the Daughters of the Dragon (Misty Knight and Colleen Wing) to free Rand. Iron Fist subsequently starred in a self-titled miniseries in 1996, before returning to a greatly expanded Heroes for Hire (1997–99).
After numerous guest appearances throughout the early 21st century, Iron Fist starred in yet another new comic, The Immortal Iron Fist (2006–09). The series, created by writers Ed Brubaker and Matt Fraction and featuring the distinctively dynamic art of David Aja, revealed that K’un-L’un was just one of the “capital cities of Heaven” and that each was championed by a martial artist of great skill. It also examined the previous holders of the mantle of the Iron Fist.
