Tintin,  cartoon character, an intrepid young investigative reporter who stars in a series of popular Belgian comic book albums. Accompanied by his faithful fox terrier, Snowy (Milou in the original French), Tintin travels the world in the service of truth and justice.
In his debut story, Tintin in the Land of the Soviets, which began as a serial in 1929 in the children’s weekly Le Petit Vingtième, the intrepid young reporter travels to Soviet Russia, exposing nefarious dealings by the Bolsheviks. In subsequent tales his inquisitive spirit takes him to the Belgian Congo, China, the United States, the high seas, and even the Moon. In humorous adventures that often reflected contemporary events, Tintin explored an increasingly complex world and always stood up for what was right.
Tintin and his creator, Hergé (pen name of Belgian cartoonist Georges Rémi), have been subject to controversy over the years. The first few Tintin stories were viewed by some as expressing a simplistic, prejudiced, at times even racist view of the world. Later in life, Hergé reworked some elements to be less offensive. Beginning with The Blue Lotus (1936), in which Tintin traveled to China, Hergé committed to intensively researching the stories in order to accurately portray locales and characters. The cartoonist’s decision to continue publishing Tintin in a German-approved newspaper throughout the Nazi occupation of Belgium was viewed in some corners as collaboration, although the stories were largely apolitical.
When Hergé died in 1983, the 24th album in the Tintin series had been only roughly sketched. The unfinished volume was published posthumously. At the beginning of the 21st century, Tintin remained a beloved character, his stories having been translated into more than 80 languages. In June 2009 a museum dedicated to the work of Hergé and the character Tintin opened in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. The Adventures of Tintin (2011), an animated film directed by Steven Spielberg, was among several screen adaptations of the series.
