Wolverine,  comic-book character whose gruff, violent disposition set the standard for later antiestablishment comic heroes. The character was created for Marvel Comics by writer Len Wein and artist John Romita, Sr. Wolverine—who possesses razor-sharp claws, the ability to rapidly heal virtually any injury, and a skeleton reinforced with an indestructible metal—made his first full appearance in The Incredible Hulk no. 181 (1974).
Wolverine was created at the request of Marvel’s then editor in chief Roy Thomas, who wanted a Canadian hero to boost north-of-the-border sales. Although artist Herb Trimpe drew the Hulk stories, it was Marvel art director John Romita, Sr., who designed the costume and clawed look of Wolverine. His initial yellow-and-blue attire did not evoke the image of a ferocious woodland animal, but his trio of claws and his surly attitude made him stand out among superheroes of the day. Readers discovered Wolverine to be a dangerous loner in the tradition of the western antihero; he has no compunctions about killing, but he treats the helpless well (as long as they cause him no trouble).
Wolverine was soon transferred to the pages of the revitalized X-Men series with Giant-Size X-Men no. 1 (1975), but he received little attention until 1977, when writer Chris Claremont and artist John Byrne developed the character further. It was revealed that Wolverine’s mutant powers included superhuman strength and reflexes, enhanced senses and tracking abilities, and a special healing power that also slows his aging. His powers enabled him to survive a mysterious process whereby his entire skeleton had been coated in an indestructible alloy known as adamantium. Over subsequent years, writers slowly revealed Wolverine’s history, notably his ties to Japan, which included a love affair with the daughter of a Japanese crime lord and a background steeped in Japanese martial arts and traditions.
This aspect of the character was explored further in Wolverine (1982), a much-lauded miniseries written by Claremont and drawn by Frank Miller. The anthology series Marvel Comics Presents, which debuted in September 1988, furthered the character by featuring a Wolverine serialized story in almost every issue. The most famous of these—a story known as “Weapon X”—ran in 1991 and finally showed the experiments by which Wolverine’s skeleton was covered with adamantium. As more details about Wolverine’s past were unveiled throughout the 1990s and the early 21st century, it became increasingly clear that the character was far older than he appeared to be. It was established that he had fought alongside Captain America and others during World War II, but he seemed older than that. The character’s full backstory was finally revealed in the Origin miniseries (2001–02), which was set near the end of the 19th century. Wolverine was born James Howlett to a wealthy family in Alberta, Canada. With a completely withdrawn mother and a busy father, James was cared for largely by a hired playmate, a red-haired girl named Rose. After the family’s groundskeeper killed James’s father, bony claws protruded from young James’s hands for the first time, and he used them to fatally stab the groundskeeper—a man later revealed to be James’s real father. This chain of events ultimately led to the suicide of James’s mother. Rose took James to a mining colony to live and gave him the name Logan.
As Marvel expanded its offerings beyond the printed page, Wolverine figured prominently in other media. Hugh Jackman offered a star-turning performance as the gruff mutant in the first live-action X-Men (2000). Jackman reprised the role in the sequels X2 (2003), X-Men: The Last Stand (2006), and X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014) and starred as the lead character in X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009), The Wolverine (2013), and Logan (2017). He made a cameo in X-Men: First Class (2011). Wolverine appeared in numerous X-Men animated television series and also starred in the animated series Marvel Anime, which premiered in Japan in 2010 and in the United States in 2011. Wolverine is also a key figure in assorted Marvel and X-Men video games.
