Torres Strait Islander peoples,  one of Australia’s two distinct Indigenous cultural groups, the other being the Aboriginal peoples. (See Researcher’s Note: Britannica usage standards: Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islander peoples of Australia.) Torres Strait Islander persons are individuals who are descended from Torres Strait Islander persons, who self-identify as Torres Strait Islander persons, or who have been recognized as Torres Strait Islander persons by their own community. Along with the Aboriginal peoples, the Torres Strait Islander peoples were the first human inhabitants of Australia, and, like the Aboriginal peoples, they have a close connection with their traditional lands (Country) and waterways and with nature. However, the Torres Strait Islander peoples have their own cultural practices, languages, and beliefs that are distinct from those of Aboriginal peoples. In the early 2010s, Torres Strait Islander peoples constituted less than 1 percent of the total Australian population and about one-tenth of the total Indigenous population of Australia.
The Torres Strait waterway lies between Papua New Guinea to the north and the Cape York Peninsula of Queensland on the Australian mainland to the south. Of the more than 100 islands that constitute the Torres Strait Islands, 17 are occupied by a total of 18 communities. All of the islands within 60 nautical miles (110 km) of Queensland were annexed in 1872 by that British colony, with the remainder annexed in 1879. The islands became part of the Australian state of Queensland following national federation in 1901. The majority of people living in the communities of the Torres Strait Islands are of Torres Strait Islander descent. More than half of Torres Strait Islander peoples, however, reside in Queensland, particularly in the northern Queensland towns of Seisia and Bamaga on Cape York.
The Torres Strait Islander peoples are of Melanesian descent, as are the people of Papua New Guinea, with whom they share similar cultural traits and customs. The Torres Strait Islander peoples have  lived on the islands for thousands of years. These islands can be divided into five cultural groups, which are represented by the white five-pointed star on the Torres Strait Islander flag: the Eastern (Meriam), Top Western (Guda Maluilgal), Near Western (Maluilgal), Central (Kulkalgal), and Inner Islands (Kaiwalagal).
The Torres Strait Islander peoples speak two distinct languages. The traditional language spoken in the Eastern Islands is Meriam Mir, and in the Western, Central, and Inner Islands the language spoken is Kala Lagaw Ya or Kala Kawa Ya, which are dialects of the same language. Since European colonization of Australia, the Torres Strait Creole (Kriol) language has developed as a mixture of Standard Australian English and traditional languages. The Torres Strait Islander peoples use Creole to communicate with each other and with non-islanders.
The waters and region of the Torres Strait are significant to the Torres Strait Islander peoples, who identify themselves by their home islands. In addition to the dozens of islands in the strait, there are also hundreds of islets, cays, reefs, and sandbanks, which are all traditionally named, owned, and used by the Torres Strait Islander peoples. According to Torres Strait Islanders’ beliefs, each island has its own unique landscape and story.
The islands and surrounding waters are the site of diverse marine ecosystems that are populated by rare species of animals and other resources that have been important forms of sustenance for Torres Strait Islander communities for thousands of years. Traditionally, the Torres Strait Islander peoples are seafarers who have relied on fishing and trade with other islands and villages along the south coast of Papua New Guinea. The economy of the Torres Strait Islander peoples is founded on the traditional practices of fishing and cultivating private gardens. Historically, the exchange of items such as feathers, turtle shells, pearl shells, tools, and canoes also was part of that economic equation.
Although all Torres Strait Islander peoples share a common way of life and reliance on the waterways, each island group has its own distinct means of survival according to its location and geographical features. The Eastern Islands (“gardening islands”) are rich in fertile volcanic soil that provides ideal agricultural conditions for the gathering of traditional foods. The Central Islands group of low sandy cays (“fishing islands”) are surrounded by coral reefs and are abundant with fish life. Situated near the coast of Papua New Guinea, the Top Western Islands (“hunting islands”) comprise mangrove muds and peats, which provide habitats for diverse wildlife. The Near Western Islands (the “rocky islands”) consist of old volcanic rock and contain the remains of the land bridge that tens of thousands of years ago connected Australia to Papua New Guinea.
The spirituality and customs of the Torres Strait Islander peoples reflect their dependence on the natural world of their home islands and the surrounding waterways. Like the Aboriginal peoples, the Torres Strait Islander peoples believe that the land, sea, skies, and other natural features, including all living things, were created by ancestral beings. Torres Strait Islander culture and spirituality are closely linked to the stars and the stories of Tagai, a great fisherman and spirit being whom the Torres Strait Islander peoples believe created the world. Tagai is represented by a constellation of stars in the southern sky. Torres Strait Islander law, customs, and practices are shaped by the Tagai stories. The Torres Strait Islander peoples’ deep knowledge of the stars and sea provide them with valuable information regarding changes in the seasons, when to plant gardens and hunt for turtles or the manatee-like dugong, and how to circumnavigate the seas.
