Melania Trump, née Melania Knauss, original name Melanija Knavs,  (born April 26, 1970, Novo Mesto, Yugoslavia [now in Slovenia]), American first lady (2017–21), the wife of Donald Trump, 45th president of the United States. She was only the second foreign-born first lady, after Louisa Adams.
Melanija Knavs grew up in Sevnica, Yugoslavia (now in Slovenia), where her father sold cars and her mother worked in the textile industry. She attended the University of Ljubljana for one year before leaving to pursue a career in modeling. She found success, first in Slovenia and later—under the name Melania Knauss—in Milan and Paris. In 1996 she was brought to New York by Paolo Zampolli’s modeling agency. In the course of her career she appeared on the covers of several magazines, and in 2000 she modeled for Sports Illustrated’s popular swimsuit edition.
Knauss first met Trump in 1998 at a fashion industry party in New York City. He was then married to Marla Maples, whom he was to divorce in 1999. After a long courtship, Trump and Knauss were married on January 22, 2005, at his estate in Palm Beach, Florida. It was his third marriage and her first. One of the guests at the wedding was Hillary Clinton. In 2006 Melania gave birth to Barron William Trump, her first child and Donald’s fifth. In that year she also became a U.S. citizen. During this time, Melania continued her career. In addition to occasionally modeling, she marketed a line of jewelry sold by the QVC company and developed a line of caviar-based skin care products.
In 2015 Donald announced that he was entering the U.S. presidential race. When he made immigration a central issue, the details of Melania’s own immigration history were scrutinized, including allegations that she worked in the United States before acquiring the appropriate visa.  Although Melania did not take a prominent role in the campaign, she spoke at the Republican National Convention in July 2016. Her speech initially drew praise but was later revealed to contain sentences and phrases similar to those spoken by Michelle Obama eight years previously. A speechwriter apologized for the seeming plagiarism. Melania subsequently maintained a low profile until several weeks before the election, when she defended her husband after a series of women accused him of sexual assault and harassment. On November 8, 2016, Donald was elected president of the United States, defeating Clinton; he took office on January 20, 2017.
Melania initially made few appearances as first lady, and she did not move into the White House until June, after her son finished the school year. However, in 2018 she launched the Be Best initiative, which focused on children. Its main objectives included ending cyberbullying. During her husband’s reelection campaign in 2020, Melania took a limited role, though she spoke at the Republican National Convention in August. Two months later both she and the president tested positive for COVID-19, but both recovered. On November 3, 2020, Donald was defeated by Joe Biden, though he contested the results, alleging voter fraud. On January 6, 2021, his supporters attacked the Capitol as Congress was meeting to certify Biden’s victory. Several days later Melania released a statement in which she condemned the violence and complained about “unwarranted personal attacks” against her. Breaking from tradition, she did not host a “tea and tour” with incoming first lady Jill Biden before Donald left office on January 20.
