Balearic Islands, Spanish Islas Baleares, Catalan Illes Balears,  archipelago in the western Mediterranean Sea and a comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) of Spain coextensive with the Spanish provincia (province) of the same name.  The archipelago lies 50 to 190 miles (80 to 300 km) east of the Spanish mainland. There are two groups of islands. The eastern and larger group forms the Balearics proper and includes the principal islands of Majorca (Mallorca) and Minorca (Menorca) and the small island of Cabrera. The western group is known as the Pitiusas and includes the islands of Ibiza (Eivissa) and Formentera. The archipelago is an extension of the sub-Baetic cordillera of peninsular Spain, and the two are linked by a sill near Cape Nao in the province of Alicante. The Balearic Islands autonomous community was established by the statute of autonomy of 1983. Palma is the capital as well as the military, judicial, and ecclesiastical centre of the autonomous community. The government encompasses the insular councils of Majorca, Minorca, and Ibiza-Formentera. Area 1,927 square miles (4,992 square km). Pop. (2007 est.) 1,030,650.
The Balearics exhibit a varied terrain, with undulating hills, plateaus, and lowlands. Minorca has extensive plains. Annual precipitation is low, rarely exceeding 18 inches (450 mm), and occurs mainly in the autumn and spring.
The raids of Barbary pirates discouraged settlement along the coast until the 19th century. The spread of tourism since the mid-19th century has led to the concentration of population along the coastal areas and the depopulation of the hinterland. The populations of Majorca and Minorca are heavily concentrated in the larger cities, while those of the islands of Ibiza and Formentera tend to be dispersed. Farmland is often subdivided into minifundios (small landholdings), the number of latifundios (large landholdings) having declined sharply since 1920.
Emigration from the hinterland has sharply reduced the agricultural workforce in the islands. The traditional Mediterranean crops of wheat, grapes, and olives predominated until 1830, when improved transport allowed new cash crops to be taken to more-distant markets. These included almonds, peaches, apricots, carob, and tomatoes. Dry farming predominates, though the waterwheels and windmills that were introduced by the Muslims for irrigation persist. Sir Richard Kane, governor of Minorca between 1712 and 1736, introduced cattle and sheep from North Africa and pigs from Sardinia; these breeds continue to be raised.
Manufacturing is of relatively little importance, and most establishments have few employees. Manufactures include shoes, furniture, and textiles. Fine lace and embroidery are made for tourists. Tourism, which dominates the economy, offers only seasonal employment, with much of the workforce idle during the winter.
Varied civilizations have left their marks on the islands, and, although the prehistoric Talayotic civilization (so termed from its characteristic rough stone towers called talayots) seems to have continued without much modification, the focal position of the islands in the Mediterranean laid them open to continued influence from civilizations centred farther to the east, as many archaeological finds attest. Important discoveries of bronze swords and single and double axes, antennae swords, and heads and figures of bulls and other animals all bear witness to foreign influence over long periods of time. Pottery, mostly of the native Talayotic types, seems to have persisted with little change until the Roman occupation. Historical evidence points to at least 2,600 years of settlement, for the islands were successively ruled by Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Moors, and Spaniards, all of whom have left their mark.
The Balearics were conquered by the Vandals in 526 and fell to the Byzantines in 534. The Muslim occupation of the islands was complete by 903. James I of Aragon conquered the islands of Majorca and Ibiza between 1229 and 1235, and Minorca fell to his descendant, Alfonso III, in 1287. The Balearics were established as an autonomous kingdom in 1298 and rejoined Aragon in 1349. The British captured Maó in 1708, and the Treaties of Utrecht in 1713 ceded Minorca to the British, who occupied it until 1802. The Balearics were established as a Spanish province in 1833. A regionalist movement emerged in the late 19th century but failed to consolidate. A statute of autonomy was proposed in 1931 but not enacted until 1983.
