Canary Islands, Spanish Islas Canarias,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) of Spain, consisting of an archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean, the nearest island being 67 miles (108 km) off the northwest African mainland. The Canaries comprise the Spanish provincias (provinces) of Las Palmas and Santa Cruz de Tenerife, as well as the insular councils of Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura, Lanzarote, Tenerife, La Palma, La Gomera, and Ferro. The autonomous community was established by the statute of autonomy of August 10, 1982. The capital is Santa Cruz de Tenerife. Area 2,875 square miles (7,447 square km). Pop. (2011) 2,082,655; (2019 est.) 2,153,389.
Physically, the Canaries fall into two groups. The western group, made up of Tenerife, Gran Canaria, La Palma, La Gomera, and Ferro islands, consists of mountain peaks that rise directly from a deep ocean floor. The eastern group comprises Lanzarote, Fuerteventura Island, and six islets surmounting a single submarine plateau, the Canary Ridge, that rises about 4,500 feet (1,400 metres) from the ocean floor. The Canary Islands were formed by volcanic eruptions millions of years ago. All the western islands exceed 4,000 feet (1,200 metres) at their highest points, with Teide Peak on Tenerife rising to 12,198 feet (3,718 metres), the highest point on Spanish soil.
The Canary Islands have a subtropical climate. Temperatures are warm and show little seasonal variation. At Las Palmas city, for example, the average afternoon temperature in August is in the high 70s F (about 26 °C), while in January it drops to about 70 °F (21 °C). Annual precipitation, which is concentrated in November and December, is low, rarely exceeding 10 inches (250 mm) anywhere except on the windward northeastern sides of the islands, where it may reach 30 inches (750 mm).
The islands’ rich volcanic soils and mild temperatures support a wide variety of vegetation that generally follows a zonal arrangement based on elevation. From sea level to about 1,300 feet (400 metres), plants characteristic of hot, arid tracts can be found, and better-watered or irrigated tracts yield crops of bananas, oranges, coffee, dates, sugarcane, and tobacco. From about 1,300 to 2,400 feet (400 to 730 metres) the climate is more Mediterranean, and cereals, potatoes, and grapes are the main crops. Elevations above 2,400 feet have an appreciably cooler climate that supports stands of holly, myrtle, laurel, and other trees.
The populations of Tenerife and Gran Canaria grew rapidly relative to those of the other islands in the 20th century. Canary Islands Spanish (a distinct dialect of Spanish) is spoken in the Canaries, and certain archaic words peculiar to the archipelago show Portuguese influences.
Agriculture has long been the economic mainstay of the Canaries. Wine from vines grown on unirrigated slopes formed the staple product until 1853. In that year a grape disease caused by phylloxera (a plant louse) attacked the vineyards, and viticulture was soon largely replaced by cochineal production. The cochineal industry declined (because of competition from synthetic dyes) in the late 19th century and was replaced by the cultivation of bananas, tomatoes, potatoes, and other vegetables and fruits. Bananas, which are still the Canaries’ leading crop, are protected in the Spanish market against foreign competition. Tomatoes are grown between November and April for export, and the cultivation of flowers and plants began in the late 20th century. Cereal grains must largely be imported. Dry farming predominates on Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, while irrigation is widespread on Gran Canaria and Tenerife. The prevalence of minifundios, or small landholdings, has hindered the mechanization of agriculture on some of the islands.
The tourist industry in the Canaries grew rapidly after 1950, with an accompanying increase in the number of hotels and government-run inns. Las Palmas and Santa Cruz de Tenerife are the main ports of call during the peak tourist season, which falls between December and March. The Canary Islands’ manufacturing industries are small-scale outside Santa Cruz de Tenerife, whose petroleum refinery processes large quantities of crude oil. The Spanish government has encouraged investment in food-processing plants.
The original inhabitants of the Canaries were the Guanches (see Guanche and Canario); now assimilated into the general population, they were a Berber people who were conquered by the Spanish in the 15th century. The Romans learned of the Canaries through Juba II, king of Mauritania, whose account of an expedition (c. 40 bce) to the islands was preserved by the writers Plutarch and Pliny the Elder. The latter mentions “Canaria, so called from the multitude of dogs [canes] of great size.” In 999 the Arabs landed and traded on Gran Canaria. During the 13th and 14th centuries Genoese, Majorcan, Portuguese, and French navigators visited the islands. Jean de Béthencourt, who became king of the islands by order of Henry III of Castile in 1404, completed the conquest of Lanzarote, Fuerteventura, and Ferro, and in December 1406 he returned to Europe, leaving his nephew Maciot in charge. Between 1420 and 1479 a Portuguese force subdued Gomera. In 1479 the Treaty of Alcáçovas recognized Spanish sovereignty over the Canaries, and the conquest of the remaining islands was completed in 1496. Christopher Columbus replenished all four of his westbound fleets in the Canaries, which became an indispensable Spanish base on sea routes to the Americas. In 1936 Gen. Francisco Franco used the islands as the first base of the Nationalist revolt, going from there to Spanish Morocco.
