Bedde,   traditional emirate, Yobe state, northern Nigeria. Although Bade (Bedde, Bede) peoples settled in the vicinity of Tagali village near Gashua as early as the 14th century, they shortly thereafter came under the jurisdiction of a galadima (“governor”) of the Bornu kingdom based at nearby Nguru (see Kanem-Bornu). Not until the late 18th century did they come under the rule of the present Gidgid (from the name of a settlement 30 miles [48 km] south-southwest of Gashua) dynasty of Bedde. Dispersed about 1808 by warriors in the jihad (holy war) conducted by the Fulani, the Bade sought protection and again agreed to pay tribute in slaves to Bornu. About 1825, however, Lawan Babuje, the Bade mai (“ruler”), found the tribute too high, organized a pan-Bade federation, built the walled town of Gorgoram (27 miles southwest of Gashua) as his capital, and declared Bedde’s independence from both the Fulani and the Kanuri. Mai Alhaji, his son and successor (reigned 1842–93), successfully defended Gorgoram from both Fulani (mostly from Hadejia town, 73 miles west-southwest) and Kanuri attacks. Although Gorgoram was captured during the reign of Mai Duna (1893–97) by the forces of Rābiḥ az-Zubayr, the Sudanese warrior who destroyed the power of Bornu, following the advent of British rule in 1902, Mai Saleh (also Sale; reigned 1897–1919) was recognized as the emir of independent Bedde.
Bedde traditional emirate is mainly inhabited by the predominantly Muslim Bade, Ngizim, and Kanuri peoples. Its arid savanna climate supports only a sparse population, but its location in the drainage systems of the seasonal Hadejia and Katagum rivers, which join together within the emirate to form the Komadugu Yobe, allows fishing during the rainy season. Peanuts (groundnuts) and cotton are the chief cash crops; but sorghum, millet, cowpeas, tobacco, and gum arabic are also collected for sale in the local markets. Cattle, goats, and sheep are the principal livestock. Gashua, by far Bedde’s largest town, is the headquarters of a local government council and a market centre as well as the seat of the Mai Bedde.
