Bourbonnais,  historic and cultural region encompassing approximately the same area as the central French département of Allier and coextensive with the former province of Bourbonnais.
In Roman times the area that became Bourbonnais was divided between Aquitania and Lugdunensis. Bourbonnais itself originated in the feudal period; it was gradually carved out of neighbouring provinces by the sires, or lords, of Bourbon, who were descended from Aimon I (10th century). One of their descendants, Louis, created 1st duke (duc) de Bourbon in 1327, was the ancestor of the great Bourbon dynasty.
Bourbonnais was confiscated by the French crown in 1527 after the death of the rebellious constable Charles III, 8th duke de Bourbon, and attached to the crown in 1531. In the 18th century different parts of Bourbonnais formed parts of five dioceses: Bourges, Clermont, Autun, Nevers, and Limoges. The principal towns of Bourbonnais were Moulins (the capital), Gannat, Montluçon, and Lapalisse. The province had a military government with headquarters at Moulins. For judicial purposes it came under the Parlement of Paris.
Physically, the region consists of a highland bordering France’s Massif Central on the north. The higher reaches are arid, but the lower Limagne region, watered by the Allier River, flowing northward out of the Massif, specializes in cereal production. Farther north cattle rearing is important. Montluçon is the main industrial centre.
Sharecropping (métayage) predominated until the early 20th century; subsequent land reform and a relatively small rural population have favoured the development of large family farms. The traditional farmstead is built of limestone and roofed with thatch or tiles. Villages tend to be clustered along old Roman roads.
Roman Catholicism predominates, and Protestantism has made few inroads outside the larger towns. There are small Protestant enclaves in Moulins, Montluçon, and Vichy. A cult of the dead persists in some rural districts, and the folklore abounds in ghosts. Priests are occasionally asked to bless barns over which a spell has allegedly been cast. The scarcity of candidates for the priesthood has contributed to the consolidation of numerous parishes. Soirees held in homes during the winter feature recitations of popular stories, legends, and songs. There are numerous local cultural societies; Montluçon alone has more than 300 such groups.
