Kaffraria,  the territories along the southeast coast of Africa that were colonized by the Portuguese and the British. The term referred more specifically in the 19th century to those lands inhabited by the Xhosa-speaking peoples of the area, now part of South Africa’s Eastern Cape province. Now considered pejorative, the term Kaffir (or Kafir; from Arabic kāfir, “infidel”) was used in the 19th century as a synonym for Xhosa.
Kaffraria was invaded by the British and the Boers in a series of wars with the Xhosa between 1779 and 1879, collectively known as the Cape Frontier Wars. In 1835 Benjamin D’Urban, a British colonial administrator of the Cape Colony, briefly annexed (without authorization) part of Kaffraria west of the Kei River as Queen Adelaide Province, but in late December of that year British Colonial Secretary Lord Glenelg, displeased with D’Urban’s actions, instructed him to return the territory to the Xhosa chiefs. The British later annexed the general area of Kaffraria again in December 1847, this time as the crown colony of British Kaffraria. The new colony had its capital at King William’s Town and covered the territory between the Keiskama (near the Fish River) and Kei rivers. The major Xhosa chieftaincies conquered in the annexation were the Ngqika and the Ndlambe.
In late 1850 the Xhosa began one last fight for their independence, which ended in their defeat in 1853. The Xhosa were then subjected to taxation and confined to areas with infertile land, both of which, in combination with drought, cattle disease, and political despair, led to famine and mass starvation in 1856–57. The British used this as an opportunity to deport Xhosa leaders and steer the Xhosa away from working the land and toward working for colonists as labourers. The British also opened British Kaffraria to European settlers, among them Germans who had fought with the British in the Crimean War. In 1865 British Kaffraria was incorporated directly into a reluctant Cape Colony. The parts of British Kaffraria still occupied by the Xhosa were amalgamated into the Ciskei “homeland” (Bantustan) after 1959.
