Lappland,  landskap (province) of northern Sweden. Lappland is bounded on the west by Norway, on the north by Finland, on the east by the landskap (provinces) of Norrbotten and Västerbotten, and on the south by those of Ångermanland and Jämtland. Administratively it lies within the län (counties) of Västerbotten and Norrbotten. The landskap covers about one-fourth of the total area of Sweden, but it is sparsely settled. Its landscape is characterized by the highest mountains in Sweden, notably Mounts Kebne (Kebnekaise) and Sarek (Sarektjåkkå), as well as rolling hills, plains, forests of spruce, pine, and birch, long chains of lakes, rushing rivers, waterfalls, and glaciers. The climate is typically Arctic, with a short growing season.
Archaeological finds indicate habitation of Lappland as early as the Stone Age. By early medieval times the area was occupied by reindeer-herding Sami (Lapps). Swedes from farther south were attracted by its valuable furs and brought the area under their domination. Territorial subdivisions called lappmark were established for the regulation and taxation of the fur trade. As Swedish cultivators settled the coastal provinces (Västerbotten and Norrbotten) and began to move up the rivers into the interior, conflicts arose with the indigenous Sami. Twice, “limits of cultivation” were established by decree, setting bounds on the Swedish migration inland; these limits became the boundary of Lappland with Västerbotten and Norrbotten.
The development of mining, beginning in the 1630s, increased settlement, and by the 1860s northern Lappland had a population of almost 6,000 people. The coming of railroads, together with large-scale mining operations, resulted in further growth. There are still a few thousand Sami in the landskap, but the majority of the people are descendants of the settlers from other parts of Sweden who moved there to work in the mines or in the forest industries.
Lappland has some of the richest iron-ore mines in the world, at Kiruna, Gällivare, and Malmberget. The landskap’s rushing torrents have been harnessed for hydroelectric power, notably at Porjus and Harsprånget. Because of the short growing season, agriculture is limited; chief crops are potatoes, barley, and rye. Tourism has become increasingly important, receiving impetus from such attractions as Sarek and Stora Sjöfallet national parks (see photograph). Abisko, Björkliden, and Riksgränsen are well-known winter-sports resorts. Lappland is accessible by road, rail, or air.
