Michelangelo Antonioni,  (born Sept. 29, 1912, Ferrara, Italy—died July 30, 2007, Rome), Italian film director, cinematographer, and producer noted for his avoidance of “realistic” narrative in favour of character study and a vaguely metaphorical series of incidents. Among his major films were Le amiche (1955; The Girlfriends), L’avventura (1960; The Adventure), L’eclisse (1962; The Eclipse), and Blow-Up (1966).
Antonioni is recognizably the product of the mild, uneventful plains of northern Italy that form the background for several of his films. Reserved and unexpansive in manner, he has said that the experience most important to his development as a filmmaker and as a man was his upbringing in a settled, bourgeois, provincial home, with a sufficiency of money; a traditional education; a code of reserve and self-discipline; and the leisure and ease necessary for a detached view of people and of life. He attended school in Ferrara and went to the university at Bologna, though he continued to live at home and commuted daily to his studies. As a child his consuming interests were architecture and painting; at the university he studied classics, then economics and commerce. He also began haunting the cinemas and writing film criticism for a newspaper in the neighbouring city of Padua. In 1939 he decided to make the cinema his career.
The obvious place to do this was Rome, where Antonioni soon became a staff member of the magazine Cinema; he also spent some months studying at a film school. What else he did in his 20s (apart from becoming an amateur tennis champion for northern Italy) remains obscure; his first credited film work dates from his 30th year, when he collaborated on the scripts of some major feature films, one of them Roberto Rossellini’s Un pilota ritorna (1942; A Pilot Returns), and went to France to assist director Marcel Carné on his wartime production Les Visiteurs du soir (1942; The Devil’s Envoys). In 1943 he began to direct his own first film, a short documentary called Gente del Po (People of the Po Valley), but its completion was interrupted by the chaos of Italy’s defeat in World War II. For a while Antonioni made his living by translating from the French; he then became film critic of the underground paper Italia libera (“Free Italy”) and wrote some unproduced scripts. Gente del Po finally appeared in 1947; it was followed by six more shorts and then, in 1950, by his first feature, Cronaca di un amore (Story of a Love Affair), a rather bitter romance that immediately established him as a talent to be watched.
After that time, Antonioni’s life, to the outside world at least, consisted of little more than the production of films. The landmarks were his first great film, Le amiche (based on a story by the Italian writer Cesare Pavese), in 1955; his first big international success, L’avventura, in 1960; his first film in colour, Il deserto rosso (Red Desert), in 1964; his first full-length English-language film, Blow-Up, in 1966; and his first American film, Zabriskie Point, in 1970. He was responsible for shaping the career of the actress Monica Vitti, whose exquisite, mysterious presence provided the warming touch of human interest that assured L’avventura, despite its puzzling narrative structure and obscurity of motive, its breakthrough to a large international audience. Some mediation of this sort is necessary in Antonioni’s films since without it his approach remains too cold and abstract to reach more than a select, esoteric audience. Human beings for him are depicted as moving parts in a pictorially exquisite pattern of moods and atmospheres; they wander around unable to engage in meaningful action, uncommunicative, lost in their dreams, while the outside world mirrors the feelings they never express, their alienation from one another and from the life around them.
Antonioni’s critical reputation stood at its highest when the impact of his new, personal vision was most immediate, between L’avventura in 1960 and L’eclisse in 1962, in both of which a young woman, portrayed by Monica Vitti, unsuccessfully seeks in romance a means of coping with the emptiness of her life. His later films—including the documentary Chung Kuo-Cina(1972), Professione: reporter (1975; The Passenger), Il mistero di Oberwald (1980;The Mystery of Oberwald), and his 1995 collaboration with Wim Wenders, Al di là delle nuvole (Beyond the Clouds)—did not earn as much acclaim. Antonioni’s place in the history of the cinema and in the development of 20th-century sensibility, however, remains secure. In 1995 he received an Academy Award for lifetime achievement.
One of the cinema’s leading aesthetes, Antonioni spearheaded a critical and commercial reaction against the overwhelming acceptance, during post-World War II years, of unvarnished reality as a cinematic ideal. Under his direction the film became a metaphor for human experience, rather than a record of it.
He never structured his films around a traditional plot or a character analysis; it was rather the visual image that became his fundamental vehicle of expression, most noticeably, the modern industrial landscape. After Antonioni, few people saw a water tower or a plastics dump with quite the same unappreciative eyes; in his films a new kind of beauty was revealed in the mechanical jungle of 20th-century urban society.
