toy theatre, also called juvenile drama,  popular 19th-century English children’s toy that provides modern theatre historians with a valuable record of the plays and playhouses of its day.
Most scholars believe the juvenile drama to have originated with the engraved sheets that began to be printed in London around 1810 as souvenirs of current plays. Each sheet depicted the principal characters of the plays in their most dramatic attitudes, and the names and fairly accurate portraits of the actors who played them were often given. The figures, which could be cut out and mounted on pasteboard, soon became a popular children’s plaything, and the souvenir sheets began to include pictures of scenery and miniature theatres as well. The success of this idea resulted in a series designed especially for children, with from 10 to 20 cutout sheets depicting all the characters and scenery of a play, together with a condensed and often bowdlerized version of the script. The pictures, which cost a penny for the plain sheets and twopence for the hand-coloured variety, were often extremely accurate representations of the costumes and scenery of such popular melodramas as The Miller and His Men and of pantomimes. They enjoyed their greatest popularity between about 1815 and 1835, but new plays continued to be produced well into the 1850s.
During this 50-year period, more than 300 plays were adapted from the London theatre, with more than 100 printsellers involved in their manufacture. With the advent of popular illustrated journals, the juvenile drama lost much of its pictorial novelty, and the increasingly realistic theatre of the later 19th century produced fewer plays that were suited to children’s entertainment. In 1884 Robert Louis Stevenson wrote an essay entitled “Penny Plain, Twopence Coloured,” a nostalgic tribute to the entire genre of juvenile drama. Germany, Austria, France, and Denmark, among other nations, had a similar type of juvenile drama.
A few publishers, such as Pollock’s in London, kept the old stock in print until the 20th century, and, after World War II, there was a revival of interest in toy theatre.
