Political action committee (PAC),  in U.S. politics, an organization whose purpose is to raise and distribute campaign funds to candidates seeking political office. PACs are generally formed by corporations, labour unions, trade associations, or other organizations or individuals and channel the voluntary contributions they raise to candidates for elective offices, primarily in the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate. PACs may also spend their funds on what are termed independent expenditures—defined in law as a message “expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate that is not made in cooperation, consultation, or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, a candidate’s authorized committee, or their agents, or a political party or its agents.”
The first PAC was created in 1944 by the Congress of Industrial Organizations, which sought to raise funds to assist the reelection of Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt. PACs were an ancillary part of political campaigns in the United States until the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (and its amendment in 1974). Ostensibly, the law was established to reduce the influence of money in campaigns by setting strict limits on the amount a particular corporation, union, or private individual could give to a candidate. By soliciting smaller contributions from a much larger number of individuals, however, PACs were able to circumvent these limitations and provide substantial funds for candidates. Following the reforms, the number of PACs proliferated, from about 600 in the early 1970s to more than 4,000 by 2010. With this proliferation came a massive escalation in the cost of running for federal office in the United States.
While most PACs have historically been associated with businesses or unions, in the early 21st century new kinds of PACs began to exert greater influence. Among them are Leadership PACs, which are often formed by politicians who might aspire to higher office (particularly the presidency) or more influence within their political party by raising funds and disbursing them to the campaigns of other candidates; Super PACs, which were established in 2010 following the U.S. Supreme Court’s Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission decision (and the subsequent SpeechNow.org v. Federal Election Commission ruling) and which allow both corporations and unions to make independent expenditures from their general treasuries; and nonconnected PACs, which are independent of corporations, unions, and political parties and which make contributions and expenditures to support a particular ideology or issue.
