Abydos, Egyptian Abdju, Coptic Ebot, modern Al-ʿArābā al-Madfūnah,  prominent sacred city and one of the most important archaeological sites of ancient Egypt. The site, located in the low desert west of the Nile River near Al-Balyanā, was a necropolis for the earliest Egyptian royalty and later a pilgrimage centre for the worship of Osiris.
The western desert embayment at Abydos, Umm al-Qaʿāb, has long been known as the royal cemetery of the 1st and 2nd dynasties. Excavations underway since the late-1970s, however, revealed a group of earlier tombs belonging to a series of kings that predate the 1st dynasty and the official unification of Egypt. These tombs have yielded a rich harvest of intact pottery, royal emblems, ivory labels, and the names of several predynastic kings. The inscribed labels also indicate that Egyptian writing had reached an advanced stage earlier than was generally recognized. In addition, several large-scale mud-brick enclosures located near the desert’s edge were identified as funerary sites for the kings of the 1st (c. 2925–c. 2775 bce) and 2nd (c. 2775–c. 2650 bce) dynasties. A series of wooden boats covered by whitewashed mud-brick casings—probably prototypes for the boats buried in pits next to the pyramids of the Old Kingdom (c. 2575–c. 2130 bce)—were discovered alongside one of the enclosures.
The tutelary deity of the necropolis city in the Old Kingdom was the jackal god, called Khenti-Imentiu; in the 5th dynasty (c. 2465–c. 2325 bce), his cult was gradually absorbed by that of the god Osiris, and the city soon became the focal point of the cult of Osiris. Abydos became a place of pilgrimage for pious Egyptians, who desired above all else to be buried as close as possible to the recognized tomb of Osiris, which was located at Abydos. For those who could not afford the expense of being buried there, stelae were set up, inscribed with the dead man’s name and titles and a prayer to the god. Thousands of these stelae have been found in the city’s cemeteries.
The pharaohs, who by this time were being buried near their city of residence rather than at Abydos, encouraged the cult of the deified king at Abydos, and they took special care to embellish and enlarge the temple of Osiris there. Over the centuries the temple of Osiris was successively rebuilt or enlarged by Pepi I, Ahmose I, Thutmose III, Ramses III, and Ahmose II. Some pharaohs of the Middle and New kingdoms had a cenotaph or a mortuary temple at Abydos. The temple of Seti I was one of the most beautiful of all such temples. Its plan is unique, for it has no fewer than seven sanctuaries, approached through two broad hypostyle halls. The sanctuaries are dedicated to the pharaoh and the principal gods of Egypt. In a long gallery leading to other rooms is a relief showing Seti and his son Ramses making offerings to the cartouches of 76 of their dead predecessors, beginning with Menes. This is the so-called Abydos list of kings. The reliefs decorating the walls of this temple are of particular delicacy and beauty. Only 26 feet (8 metres) behind the temple of Seti I is a remarkable structure known as the Osireion, which is thought to be Seti’s cenotaph. This curious monument is an underground vaulted hall containing a central platform with 10 monolithic pillars surrounded by a channel of water. Another temple to Osiris, now much ruined, was built by Ramses II to the north of Seti’s temple.
Around and between the various temples of Abydos is a vast complex of cemeteries used in every period of early Egyptian history, from the prehistoric age to Roman times.
