Antioch, Turkish Antakya,  populous city of ancient Syria and now a major town of  south-central  Turkey. It lies near the mouth of the Orontes River, about 12 miles (19 km) northwest of the Syrian border.
Antioch  was founded in 300 bce by Seleucus I Nicator, a former general of Alexander the Great. The new city soon became the western terminus of the caravan routes over which goods were brought from Persia and elsewhere in Asia to the Mediterranean. Antioch’s strategic command of north-south and east-west roads across northwestern Syria greatly contributed to its growth and prosperity in Hellenistic, Roman, and Byzantine times. The suburb of Daphne, five miles to the south, was a favourite pleasure resort and residential area for Antioch’s upper classes; and the seaport Seleucia Pieria, at the mouth of the Orontes River, was the city’s harbour.
Antioch was the centre of the Seleucid kingdom until 64 bce, when it was annexed by Rome and was made the capital of the Roman province of Syria. It became the third largest city of the Roman Empire in size and importance (after Rome and Alexandria) and possessed magnificent temples, theatres, aqueducts, and baths. The city was the headquarters of the Roman garrison in Syria, one of whose principal duties was the defense of the empire’s eastern border from Persian attacks.  Antioch was also one of the earliest centres of Christianity; it was there that the followers of Christ were first called Christians, and the city was  the headquarters of the missionary St. Paul about 47–55 ce.
In the 4th century ce Antioch became the seat of a new Roman office that administered all the provinces on the empire’s eastern flank. Because the church of Antioch had the distinction of having been founded by the apostles Peter and Paul, its bishop ranked with the bishops of the other apostolic foundations—Jerusalem, Rome, and Alexandria (Constantinople [now Istanbul] was accepted in this category later). The bishops of Antioch thus became influential in theology and ecclesiastic politics.
Antioch prospered in the 4th and 5th centuries from nearby olive plantations,  but the 6th  century  brought a series of disasters from which the city never fully recovered. A fire in 525 was followed by earthquakes in 526 and 528,  and the city  was captured temporarily by the Persians in 540 and 611. Antioch was absorbed into the Arab caliphate in 637. Under the Arabs it shrank to the status of a small town. The Byzantines recaptured the city in 969, and it served as a frontier fortification until taken by the Seljuq Turks in 1084. In 1098 it was captured by the Crusaders, who made it the capital of one of their principalities, and in 1268 the city was taken by the Mamlūks, who razed it to the ground.  Antioch never recovered from this last disaster, and it had declined to a small village when taken by  the Ottoman Turks in 1517.  It remained part of  the Ottoman Empire  until after World War I, when it was transferred to Syria under French mandate. France allowed the town and surrounding area to rejoin Turkey in 1939.
Remarkably few remains of the ancient city are now visible, since most of them lie buried beneath thick alluvial deposits from the Orontes River. Nevertheless, important archaeological discoveries have been made in the locality. Excavations conducted in 1932–39 in Daphne and Antioch uncovered a large number of fine mosaic floors from both private houses and public buildings. Dating largely from the Roman imperial period, many of the floors represent copies of famous ancient paintings that otherwise would have been unknown. The mosaics are now exhibited in the local Archaeological Museum.
The activities of the modern town are based mainly on the agricultural produce of the adjacent area, including the intensively cultivated Amik plain. The chief crops are wheat, cotton, grapes, rice, olives, vegetables, and fruit. The town has soap and olive-oil factories and cotton ginning and other processing industries. Silk, shoes, and knives are also manufactured.  Pop. (2000) 144,910; (2013 est.) 216,960.
