Ayutthaya, in full Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Ayutthaya also spelled Ayudhya, Ayuthia, or Ayuthaya,  town and former capital of the Tai state of Ayutthaya (Siam) located in central Thailand, about 55 miles (89 km) north of Bangkok. The site of immense temples and other structures that are important both historically and architecturally, Ayutthaya was added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List in 1991.
The town was founded by Ramathibodi I about 1350 on an island formed by the confluence of the Chao Phraya, Lop Buri, and Pa Sak rivers. The modern state of Thailand can be said to date from its founding, for the kings of Ayutthaya extended their influence until their state became one of the most powerful in Southeast Asia. Its territory extended over all of present-day Thailand, except the far east and far north, and along the Bilauktaung and Dawna ranges within the territory now constituting southeastern Myanmar (Burma). The town, often referred to as Krung Kao (“ancient capital”), flourished for more than 400 years and at its height may have supported hundreds of thousands of residents. Most of the architecture, art, and literature of Ayutthaya was destroyed in the sack of the city by the armies of the Myanmar king Hsinbyushin in 1767, marking the end of the kingdom. A new Tai kingdom was established to the south at Thon Buri, on the Chao Phraya opposite modern-day Bangkok.
The town is intersected by many canals, and houseboats and shop boats crowd the water. Pagodas and impressive spires abound. The Wat Phra Si Sanphet, a monastery on the grounds of the so-called Wang Luang (Ancient Palace), served as the royal chapel and once contained an image of the Buddha covered in some 375 pounds (170 kg) of gold. Other palaces in Ayutthaya are the Chantharakasem (Chandra Kasem; Front Palace), lying on the bank of the Pa Sak River, and the Wang Lang (Rear Palace), on the site of a former royal garden near the western city wall. The Chedi Si Suriyothai (Queen Suriyothai Memorial) is a monument to a famous queen who died in battle saving her husband, and Phra Mongkhon Bophit sanctuary contains one of the world’s largest seated images of the Buddha. Ayutthaya also has a massive elephant kraal (walled enclosure), last used in 1903 in a pageant for royal guests. The nearby historic towns of Bang Pa-In and Nakhon Luang also have impressive palaces. The modern town, set quietly among its magnificent ruins, is linked by road, rail, and river with Bangkok and is the site of Ayutthaya Agricultural College. A number of products are manufactured in the town, including cement, paper and pulp, electronics, synthetic fibre, and chemical products. Tourism is a major source of income. Pop. (2000 prelim.) 75,898.
