Chauvet–Pont d’Arc,  painted cave in southeast France considered to be one of the greatest Paleolithic sanctuaries ever discovered. It is noted both for the originality and quality of its animal representations and for their great age. Chauvet–Pont d’Arc was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2014.
In 1994 a French speleologist noticed a faint draft coming from a heap of stones blocking the end of a small cave overlooking the left bank of the Ardèche River (a tributary of the Rhône) in southern France. A draft often indicates a continuation behind an obstruction. Speleologist Michel Rosa and several friends tried to get through but were blocked by a stalagmite that obstructed the very narrow passage. Months later, French Ministry of Culture park ranger Jean-Marie Chauvet pursued the exploration. After destroying the obstruction, he and speleologist Éliette Brunel Deschamps crawled through the opening and reached the roof of an unknown cave. With the help of a spelunking ladder, they descended 26 feet (8 metres) to the ground below. That day, with Brunel Deschamps’s daughter and fellow speleologist Christian Hillaire, they explored about three-quarters of the approximately 91,493-square-foot (8,500-square-metre) cave. A week later they returned to finish the exploration, along with friends Daniel André, Michel Chabaud, and Jean-Louis Payan, and it was then that they discovered the great paintings in what is now called the Megaloceros gallery and those in the cave’s End Chamber.
On December 29, 1994, at the request of the French Ministry of Culture, French archaeologist Jean Clottes visited the cave and applied his scientific expertise to assess the nature and quality of the discovery. The following February he took tiny samples of charcoal from the ground, from torch marks on the walls, and from a few drawings in order to radiocarbon-date them. The results indicated that the oldest drawings were much older than expected, with uncalibrated dates between 30,000 and 32,000 bp (see below Dating and its consequences for the history of art). A scientific team began its work in spring 1998 under the leadership first of Clottes and then (from 2002 onward) of Jean-Michel Geneste (then director of the National Centre for Prehistory at Périgueux, Dordogne). It was the first time worldwide that such a complete scientific team was assembled to study a major rock art site.
From the beginning of the project, protecting such an exceptional cave had been the overriding priority. Protecting the site meant never trampling on soft ground, in order to respect even the faintest traces left behind. It also implied keeping the cave conditions as they were found and preventing drastic change to the cave’s floors, its walls, and its climate. In order to do so, the French Ministry of Culture decided that the cave would not be open to the public. To protect the ground, metal passageways were installed throughout the chambers so that visitors would be required to follow them.
A viewer’s first impression of the cavern is that it is vast and glittering. The first chamber is more than 131 feet (40 metres) wide and, in some places, nearly 98 feet (30 metres) high, with many stalactites and stalagmites that reflect the light of headlamps. The whole surface of the cave is approximately 91,493 square feet (8,500 square metres), and its total length is about 820 feet (250 metres). The cave is indeed large by any standard, and it must have felt even bigger to its Paleolithic visitors with their wooden torches of Scotch pine (Pinus sylvestris), which cast a feeble glow around them. During the Ice Age the porch of the original entrance was likely visible from the valley, but then part of the cliff collapsed, and the cave was closed off to both humans and big animals.
The numerous bones discovered in the cave revealed that it had long been frequented by bears. Radiocarbon dating of some of the bear bones suggests that the animals went into the cave to hibernate thousands of years before people entered it. Many died during hibernation, and several thousand bones, including 195 skulls, were found on the surface of the cave floor. Cave bears scratched the walls, left impressive footprints on the soft ground, and dug dozens of wallows for sleeping.
All this did not escape the notice of early human visitors. The team of scientists discovered evidence that the earliest visitors, upon finding the cave bear remains, had placed a skull on a large stone after making a fire on its surface. On the ground around the stone, they gathered a number of other skulls. Not far from the entrance, the team of scientists found two cave bear humeri about 30 feet (9.1 metres) apart that had been stuck into the ground, each near a bear skull.
