Dubrovnik, Italian Ragusa,  port of Dalmatia, southeastern Croatia. Situated on the southern Adriatic Sea coast, it is usually regarded as the most picturesque city on the Dalmatian coast and is referred to as the “Pearl of the Adriatic.”
Dubrovnik (derived from dubrava in Croatian, meaning “grove”) occupies a promontory jutting into the sea under the bare limestone mass of Mount Srdj. The port’s sea fortifications rise directly from the water’s edge, and the massive round tower (completed 1464) of the Minc̆eta Fortress dominates the city on the landward side. The old city of Dubrovnik was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979. Pop. (2001) 31,756; (2011) 28,434.
The city was founded about 614 as Rausa, or Ragusium, by Roman refugees fleeing the Slav and Avar sack of Epidaurus, just to the southeast. A colony of Slavs soon joined the Romans there, and from an early date the city formed a link between two great civilizations. After the fall of Rome, Dubrovnik was ruled by the Byzantine Empire. From the 9th to the 12th century Dubrovnik defended itself against foreign powers, and in the period 1205 to 1358 it acknowledged Venetian suzerainty, though it retained much of its independence. The city-republic was liberal in character, affording asylum to refugees of all nations—one of them, according to legend, was King Richard I (the Lionheart) of England, who landed on the offshore island of Lokrum in 1192 on his return from the Crusades—and abolishing the slave trade in 1418, and by means of treaty and tribute it enlarged its territory along the Dalmatian coast. In 1272 the city received a statute that incorporated Roman and local practices. Situated at the seaward end of overland trade routes to Byzantium and the Danube region, it became a great mercantile power. Ragusan land trade flourished throughout the Balkans.
In 1420, when Dalmatia was sold to Venice, Dubrovnik remained a free city in all but name. For centuries the people of Dubrovnik were able to preserve their city-republic by skillful maneuvering between East and West. A strategic treaty with Turkey protracted Dubrovnik’s liberty and maintained the opportunity for a major trading role between the Ottoman Empire and Europe. In the 16th century Dubrovnik traded with India and the Americas (the republic was among the first to recognize the independence of the United States in the late 18th century), and the city contributed ships to Spain in 1588 for the Armada’s abortive invasion of England.
A great flourishing of art and literature, in the 15th–17th century, earned it the title of “the South Slav Athens.” For the first time in the history of the South Slavs, the language of the people was introduced into literature. The city’s literary history, however, never compared to its maritime and mercantile achievements.
In 1667 an earthquake destroyed parts of the city, including the cathedral and many monasteries and palaces, and killed as many as 5,000 residents. The republic did not regain its prosperity until the Napoleonic Wars. From 1800 to 1805, as the only neutral Mediterranean state, it secured a large share of the carrying trade. Napoleon I subjugated Dubrovnik in 1808, and the Congress of Vienna (1815) gave Dubrovnik to Austria; in 1918 it was incorporated into Yugoslavia. Many of Dubrovnik’s historic buildings suffered damage in 1991–92 during Croatia’s struggle for independence, but much of the old city has since been restored.
The city walls, mostly a double line, have long been a source of pride for Dubrovnik. The walls were erected by the 16th century and run a course of about 6,365 feet (1,940 metres) in length, encircling most of the old city, and reach a maximum height of about 80 feet (25 metres). Along its course and within the walls lie several towers and fortresses, as well as numerous historic monuments. Beyond the walls are many villas surrounded by gardens. The basic city plan dates from 1292, when the port was rebuilt following a fire. The Stradun, or main street, with beautiful late-Renaissance houses on each side, runs along a valley that, until 1272, was a marshy channel dividing the Latin island of Ragusa from the forest settlement of Dubrovnik. No motor vehicles are allowed inside the walls, and, except for the Stradun, the old city is a maze of picturesque narrow streets, many of them steep and twisting.
Two 14th-century convents stand at the ends of the city; the Franciscans guarded the western gate, while the Dominicans kept the eastern. The Rector’s Palace, dating from the 15th century and built in the late Gothic style, was the seat of government of the Dubrovnik Republic and is a masterpiece of Dalmatian architecture. Other notable structures include numerous fortresses (such as Lovrijenac, which sits atop a cliff); a 16-sided fountain and bell tower, both of which originally date from the 15th century; and a 15th-century Jewish synagogue that is among the oldest in Europe. The island of Lokrum is famous for its gardens and orange groves, and it also includes a fortress and monastery.
Direct rail lines connected Dubrovnik to surrounding countries, but there are only indirect links with other Croatian cities. From its harbour at nearby Gruž, ships ply to other Dalmatian ports and to Italy. The port and tourism are the leading factors in the city’s economy, and there are some light industries. There is an airport in nearby Čilipi with service to Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, and several major European cities.
Dubrovnik is home to many fine museums. The Museum of Dubrovnik, sited in the Rector’s Palace, contains extensive collections of furniture and uniforms. The inventory of Dubrovnik’s old pharmacy (founded in the 14th century), jewelry, embroideries, and paintings are displayed in the Franciscan monastery. The Maritime Museum, established in 1941 and located in a former fortress, chronicles the city’s seafaring past. The Dubrovnik State Archives, with manuscripts in numerous languages and some dating to 800 years ago, are located in the Sponza Palace (formerly a mint). There are also archaeological, ethnographic, and theatrical museums. A summer arts festival featuring theatre and music and other annual festivals attract many tourists to the scenic city.
