Gascony, French Gascogne,  historical and cultural region encompassing the southwestern French départements of Landes, Gers, and Hautes-Pyrénées and parts of Pyrénées-Atlantiques, Lot-et-Garonne, Tarn-et-Garonne, Haute-Garonne, and Ariège and coextensive with the historical region of Gascony.
During ancient Roman rule in Gaul, the area, which was ethnically more Iberian than Celtic, was detached from Aquitania to form the separate province of Novempopulana. Taken from the Visigoths by the Franks after the Battle of Vouillé (507), the region was overrun from 561 by the Basques, or Vascones; in 602 the Frankish kings recognized Vasconia, or Gascony, as a duchy under the national leader Genialis. In the latter half of the 7th century, the Gascon duke Loup (Lupus) extended his power over adjacent areas, and by the latter half of the 10th century his successors controlled all of Gascony as well as Bordeaux, Bazadais, and Agenais (now Agen).
In 1032 a war of succession broke out, and Gascony was eventually won in 1052 by Guy-Geoffrey (from 1058 William VIII, duke of Aquitaine). But in the meantime, effective power within the duchy had devolved on the greater counts and viscounts (such as those of Armagnac and Lomagne), who were to dominate Gascony for centuries. In the 12th century the ducal title passed with the Aquitanian inheritance to the Plantagenet kings of England. Throughout the years of intermittent warfare between England and France, up to the definitive French reconquest at the end of the Hundred Years’ War, Gascony remained the kernel of English royal power in southwestern France. Gascony was merged with Guyenne in the gouvernement of Guyenne-et-Gascogne during the ancien régime.
The region consists of the northern foothills of the Pyrenees mountain chain and extends from the Basque Country along the France-Spain border in the extreme southwestern corner of France eastward some 150 miles (240 km) to the vicinity of Toulouse on the upper course of the Garonne River. The traditional farmstead of the Basque Country is built of cob and covered with wood shingles; above the portal is a placard that features the date of construction or the name of the proprietor. The patriarch of the Basque family is the etcheko jaun; his primary task is to preserve the patrimony intact, and the custom of undivided inheritance has resulted in the emigration of disinherited sons and daughters. Pastures in the Basque Country are often collectively owned.
The Basques, who were not converted to Christianity until the 10th century, are predominantly Roman Catholic. The Basque language continues to be spoken by approximately one-fifth of the Basques living in France. The Gascon dialect is a variant of Occitan and is distinguished by strong Basque influences. French was adopted as the literary language in the 16th century; numerous folkloric poems in the Gascon dialect have been preserved. The stereotyped Gascon of French popular literature is impetuous and hotheaded (e.g., the elder Alexandre Dumas’s character d’Artagnan and Edmond Rostand’s Cyrano de Bergerac).
