Highclere Castle,  stately home in Hampshire, England, owned by the earls of Carnarvon. The castle has more than 200 rooms and stands on a tract of about 1,060 acres (430 hectares). It gained fame as the setting for the television series Downton Abbey (2010–15).
Highclere is located on land that came under the control of the bishops of Winchester in 749 and was held by them for some 800 years. In the late 14th century, Bishop William of Wykeham was involved in the construction of a palace (bishop’s residence) on the grounds. In 1551, during the Protestant Reformation, King Edward VI confiscated the property from the church. Originally granted by the king to the Fitzwilliam family, Highclere had several owners during the next century and a quarter. A manor house was built in the early 17th century. In 1679 the property was purchased by the politician and future attorney general Sir Robert Sawyer. In the early 18th century, Sawyer’s heirs laid out drives and walkways, planted formal gardens, and built several follies—picturesque but nonfunctional structures with names like Heaven’s Gate and Jackdaw’s Castle.
Henry Herbert, a descendant of Sawyer, inherited Highclere Castle in 1769 and was created 1st earl of Carnarvon in 1793. He brought in the noted landscape architect Lancelot Brown, who planted large numbers of trees and made other changes that gave the grounds a more natural, unplanned appearance. But the most conspicuous changes to Highclere were made by the 3rd earl, who in 1838 commissioned the architect Sir Charles Barry, best known for the Houses of Parliament in London, to remodel the manor house completely in the Elizabethan (or “Jacobethan”) style. The exterior and interior work took decades to complete, and the castle became known for its opulence. Notably, the Saloon now features 17th-century Spanish leather wall coverings collected by the 3rd earl, and the walls of the Music Room are hung with 16th-century Italian embroideries
Highclere Castle later opened its doors to paying visitors and hired out its grand rooms and gardens for several television and film productions, including Stanley Kubrick’s Eyes Wide Shut (1999). However, Highclere made its strongest public impression in Downton Abbey. Julian Fellowes, creator and executive producer of the series, became familiar with the history of the house, and certain details of the show, such as the use of the mansion for the care of World War I casualties, are based on fact.
Before Downton Abbey, Highclere Castle was known primarily for its association with the 5th earl of Carnarvon, patron of the Egyptological expedition that discovered and opened the tomb of the pharaoh Tutankhamun in 1922. Egyptian antiquities from the 5th earl’s collection were later put on display in the castle.
