Mammoth Cave National Park,  national park containing an extensive system of limestone caverns in west-central Kentucky, U.S. It was designated a World Heritage site in 1981. The park, authorized in 1926 but fully established only on July 1, 1941, occupies a surface area of 83 square miles (215 square km). In 1972 a passage was discovered linking Mammoth Cave and the Flint Ridge Cave System, which also is within the national park; in 1983 a connection to Roppel Cave, which lies to the east of the park, was found. The explored and mapped underground passages of the entire multilevel system have a combined length of at least 400 miles (650 km), making it the longest cave system in the world.
The caves were formed by the dissolution of limestone by water, a continuing process; their natural temperature is 54 °F (12 °C), with a relative humidity of a high 87 percent. They contain underground lakes and rivers and numerous unique geologic formations, including stalactites and stalagmites, to which descriptive names, such as Pillars of Hercules or Frozen Niagara, have been given. To the caves’ large natural entrance have been added several artificial ones (including access by elevator), and a number of scenic tours through the caverns have been laid out for visitors.
The subterranean passages are inhabited by various animals that have undergone evolutionary adaptation to the dark environment, including cave crickets, eyeless fish, and eyeless crayfish. Also found within the caves are fungi or related species.
The mummified bodies of some American Indians, possibly of pre-Columbian origin, have been found in Mammoth Cave. During the War of 1812 the cave was mined for nitrates for use in making gunpowder, and it was later used as a tuberculosis hospital.
The park’s aboveground area is mostly covered with hardwood forest. The Green and Nolin rivers meander across the park’s hilly surface. White-tailed deer, foxes, opossums, squirrels, and rabbits, together with bats, reptiles, and birds, including reintroduced wild turkeys, are some of the animal species inhabiting the park. Canoeing, fishing, hiking in the forests, and camping, in addition to visiting the caves, are popular activities.
