Midlothian,  council area and historic county in southeastern Scotland, south of the Firth of Forth. The historic county and council area cover somewhat different territories. The council area encompasses a suburban and rural area south and southeast of Edinburgh. The northern part of the council area occupies the low coastal plain bordering the Firth of Forth. The rest is gently rolling country that gradually slopes upward to the Moorfoot Hills in the south. The River Esk flows northward through the area to drain into the Firth of Forth. The council area lies entirely within the historic county, which also encompasses the southeastern portion of West Lothian council area, a hilly region south of the Moorfoot Hills surrounding the upper valley of Gala Water in the Scottish Borders council area, the town of Musselburgh in East Lothian council area, and most of the council area of the city of Edinburgh, including the city’s historic core.
The remains of prehistoric forts are found on several hilltops in the historic county of Midlothian, and Roman settlements have been identified at Inveresk and Cramond, which probably lay along the main Roman road leading northward from England. Along with the rest of the Lothian region, Midlothian was subsequently held by the Angles of Northumbria, but in the 11th century ce King Malcolm II of Scotland (reigned 1005–34) conquered the area. Edinburgh became the capital of Scotland in the 15th century. Midlothian’s history from that time is essentially that of Edinburgh, and until the 20th century the county was known as Edinburghshire.
Aside from the architectural riches of Edinburgh, Midlothian has the remains of many ecclesiastical buildings, including the great Cistercian abbey at Newbattle and a church of the Knights Templar at Temple. Numerous castles and country mansions built after 1400 survive, particularly near Edinburgh. Famous battle sites are at Pinkie (1547), Carberry Hill (1567), and Rullion Green (1666).
Crops raised in Midlothian council area include oats, barley, potatoes, turnips, and wheat, and dairy cattle and sheep are kept. The leading industrial sector is electronics manufacturing, concentrated in the suburban towns outside Edinburgh, and there is a sizeable service sector. Dalkeith is the administrative centre. Other large towns include Bonnyrigg, Loanhead, and Penicuik. Area council area, 137 square miles (354 square km). Pop. (2001) council area, 80,941; (2011) council area, 83,187.
