Mount Wutai, Chinese (Pinyin) Wutai Shan or (Wade-Giles romanization) Wu-t’ai Shan,  mountain in northeastern Shanxi province, northern China. It is actually a cluster of flat-topped peaks, from which it takes its name, wutai meaning “five terraces”; the highest peak is 10,033 feet (3,058 metres) above sea level. It is also the name of a mountain chain, a massif with a southwest-northeast axis that is separated from the Heng Mountains to the northwest by the valley of the Hutuo River; the Hutuo curves eastward around the chain’s southern flank to flow into the Huangbizhuang Reservoir and then the North China Plain in Hebei province, where it joins the Hai River system.
Mount Wutai is particularly famous as one of the great holy places of Buddhism. Great numbers of temples, including some of the oldest wooden buildings surviving in China, are scattered over the mountain. The largest temples—such as Xiantong, Tayuan, and Pusading—are grouped around the town of Taihuai Zhen.
Prior to its association with Buddhism, Mount Wutai appears to have been designated a holy mountain of Daoism during the later Han dynasty (ad 25–220). It came into prominence in the 5th century during the Bei (Northern) Wei dynasty (386–534/535), when, as Qingliang Mountain, it became identified as the dwelling place of Manjusri (Chinese Wenshushili) bodhisattva (a being who voluntarily postpones Buddhahood in order to work for worldly welfare and understanding). The cult of Manjusri intensified during the Tang dynasty (618–907). In early Tang times Mount Wutai was closely associated with the patriarchs of the Huayan (Kegon) school of Buddhism, becoming the principal centre of their teaching. During that period it attracted scholars and pilgrims not only from all parts of China but also from Japan, who continued to visit and study there until the 12th century.
Many of the other monasteries in the region were attached to Chan (Zen) Buddhism, which during the 9th century enjoyed the patronage of the provincial governors of the neighbouring areas of Hebei. This arrangement protected Mount Wutai from the worst ravages of the great religious persecution that occurred from 843 to 845. Under Mongol rule in the late 13th century, Tibetan Buddhism was first introduced to Mount Wutai. During the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), when the Tibetan Buddhist religion was an important element in relations between the Chinese court and its Mongol and Tibetan vassals and when the state gave lavish support to monasteries inhabited by lamas (monks), Mount Wutai was one of the principal monastic centres.
Few of the present buildings are from earlier periods, but the main hall of Foguang Temple, dating from 857, is one of the oldest surviving wooden buildings in China. In addition, the main hall of Nanchan Temple, originally dating to at least 782, was reconstructed in 1974–75. In 2009 Mount Wutai was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site.
