Norwich,  city (district), administrative and historic county of Norfolk, England. It is located along the River Wensum above its confluence with the River Yare, about 100 miles (160 km) northeast of London.
The site does not seem to have been occupied until Saxon times, when the village of Northwic was founded on a gravel terrace above the Wensum. By 1004, when Norwich was sacked by the Danes, it had become an important market centre. Shortly after the Norman Conquest (1066), the cathedral church and a Benedictine monastery were founded near the river. The distinctive cathedral has a Norman apse and nave; among its Perpendicular Gothic additions is a 15th-century stone spire rising to 315 feet (96 metres), one of the tallest in England. The cathedral also has well-preserved cloisters that are the largest in England. A Norman castle (12th century) east of the town’s principal market has been since 1894 the city’s main museum and art gallery, with an archaeological collection and paintings of the Norwich school, which flourished in the 19th century.
Until the late 18th century Norwich was one of the most prosperous of English provincial towns, challenged only by Bristol and York. The first charter dates from 1158. The prosperity of the medieval town is reflected in the number of churches dating from this period, 30 of which still exist. The town’s prosperity was based upon the woolen industry, which was aided by Edward III, who induced Flemish weavers to settle in Norwich in 1336, and also by the influx of immigrants (mainly from the Low Countries) during the reign of Elizabeth I. In 1579 nearly a third of the town’s population of 16,000 were immigrants. During the 15th century the flint Guildhall was built overlooking the market square. At the time of the English Civil Wars (1642–51) the population was predominantly behind the Parliamentary cause, and the town saw little strife.
From the 18th century Norwich declined in relation to the new industrial centres of the north. However, the city developed as one of England’s largest centres of footwear manufacturing. Although some of that manufacturing has remained, much of the focus has shifted toward footwear wholesaling. Engineering, printing, and food processing (notably mustard) are also important, but services (including tourism) now constitute much of the local economic activity. Norwich is one of England’s major agricultural and livestock markets and serves as a shopping and entertainment centre for an extensive area. Its football (soccer) club, Norwich City, plays at Carrow Road stadium. The University of East Anglia, founded in 1964, includes the Centre of East Anglian Studies and is situated at Earlham Hall, long associated with the Gurney family. The city also has a central library and the little Maddermarket Theatre. Norwich is the traditional regional capital of East Anglia and an important centre of modern administration; located there are headquarters of the Norfolk county authority, as well as those of the county districts of Broadland and the city of Norwich. Area 15 square miles (39 square km). Pop. (2001) 174,047; (2011) 132,512.
