Sintra, also spelled Cintra,  town, western Portugal. It is located about 15 miles (24 km) west-northwest of Lisbon. The town constitutes three parishes of Lisbon (Santa Maria e São Miguel, São Martinho, and São Pedro de Pennaferrim) and is within the much larger Sintra concelho (municipality).
Sintra is picturesquely situated on the northern slope of the rugged Sintra Mountains. An area of former royal summer residence, Sintra possesses a beauty that was celebrated by Lord Byron in his poem Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, and English author Robert Southey referred to Sintra as “the most blessed spot on the whole inhabitable globe.” Sintra was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1995.
On one of the mountain peaks is the Pena Palace, a 19th-century castle, partly an adaptation of a 16th-century monastery and partly an imitation of a medieval fortress, which was built for Queen Maria II by her young German consort, Ferdinand II. On the extensive grounds of the castle, Ferdinand  created the Parque da Pena, a series of gardens and walking paths that incorporated more than 2,000 species of domestic and nonnative plants. Loosely adopting the conventions established by the English garden movement in the 18th century, the park incorporates natural elements throughout, adapting to the area’s rugged terrain rather than reshaping it. On another peak is Castle dos Mouros, which was built by the Moors in the 8th and 9th centuries. The 15th-century royal palace, a mixture of Moorish and debased Gothic architecture, is in the old-town section of Sintra. The palace served as a refuge for the royal family during the summer months, when Lisbon could become uncomfortably hot, and during times of plague. Although damaged in the earthquake of 1755, the palace was painstakingly restored, and in the 21st century more than 400,000 tourists visited it each year. These buildings and the nearby Monserrate Palace and its park are among the best examples of landscape gardening on the Iberian Peninsula.
Sintra is an agricultural trade centre, and tourism is a major industry. The town is home to an extension of the Portuguese Air Museum, a collection of vintage aircraft and exhibits that pay tribute to Portuguese achievements in aviation. Granite, basalt, limestone, marble, and alabaster are quarried in the surrounding area. Afonso I captured Sintra from the Moors in 1147. Two major conventions were negotiated in Sintra, one in 1509 between Portugal and Castile concerning voyages of exploration and another in 1808 by which the British and Portuguese allowed the defeated French army to return home during the Peninsular War (1808–14). Pop. (2001) town, 25,630; mun., 363,749; (2011) town, 29,591; mun., 377,835.
