Sousse, also spelled Sūsah or Sousa,  town located in east-central Tunisia. It is an important port and commercial centre that originated as the Phoenician settlement of Hadrumetum. Used by Hannibal as his base during the Second Punic War (218–201 bce), Sousse changed its allegiance during the Third Punic War (149–146 bce) and consequently gained the status of a free town. It declined under Arab control but was revived by the Aghlabid rulers of Kairouan (Al-Qayrawān) in the 9th century, whose port it remained until the invasions of the Bedouin Arabs in the 11th century. Sousse was reestablished as a prominent port under the French protectorate (1881–1955); during World War II, the town and its port were seriously damaged.
Reconstruction of the town, especially since the 1960s, has seen a new emphasis on tourism, including the construction of a marina at Port El-Kantaoui. Sousse is once again an important trade centre, and agricultural activity has declined in favour of fishing and tourism. Major economic pursuits include sardine canning, automotive parts manufacture and assembly, olive oil processing, and cotton textile milling. The University of Sousse (1986), located in the town, offers courses in a number of faculties. The old town, enclosed by ramparts that date from the Byzantine period and from the Aghlabid dynasty, contains the Great Mosque (founded in the 9th century by the Aghlabid emir Abū al-ʿAbbās Muḥammad) and ribāṭ (monastery-fortress; dating from the 9th century), the souks (marketplaces), and some Muslim quarters; the old city was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1988. The town is also the site of extensive catacombs dating back to the sizeable Christian presence in the 3rd century ce.
The region in which Sousse is situated encompasses a lightly undulating coastal plain where olive trees and esparto grass are cultivated. Its main centres, in addition to Sousse, are Monastir (Al-Munastīr) and Mahdia (Al-Mahdiyyah). Sousse is linked by road and rail to Tunis, Sfax (Ṣafāqis), Gabès (Qābis), and Gafsa (Qafṣah). Pop. (2004) 173,047.
