Third Reich,  official Nazi designation for the regime in Germany from January 1933 to May 1945, as the presumed successor of the medieval and early modern Holy Roman Empire of 800 to 1806 (the First Reich) and the German Empire of 1871 to 1918 (the Second Reich).
With the onset of the Great Depression in 1929, Germany’s Weimar Republic was plunged into a catastrophic economic freefall. The political repercussions were immediate: the coalition government of Social Democratic chancellor Hermann Müller collapsed and the Nazis and Communists saw membership spikes as Germans abandoned more moderate parties. In July 1930 the new chancellor, Heinrich Brüning of the Roman Catholic Centre Party, forced through his economic program by resorting to the emergency powers available under Article 48 of the Weimar constitution. Days later he dissolved the Reichstag and called for new elections. In September 1930 the new Reichstag was seated with greatly increased representation for both the Nazis and the Communists.
Brüning succeeded in staying in office by tacking sharply to the right and appealing to nationalism, but by early 1932 the number of unemployed in Germany exceeded six million. In the election of March 1932, incumbent Pres. Paul von Hindenburg failed to obtain an outright majority, but in a runoff election the following month he outpolled Nazi leader Adolf Hitler by about six million votes. Although Hindenburg wished to replace the moribund Brüning, he was reluctant to elevate Hitler and settled on Franz von Papen. Papen, in an attempt to shore up his parliamentary standing, called a snap election in July 1932. The move was a disaster for Papen’s young administration, and the Nazis won 230 seats in the Reichstag. Papen called another election in November 1932, and the Nazis saw a significant share of their vote erode at the expense of a steadily growing Communist Party and Alfred Hugenberg’s German National People’s Party.
The political deadlock continued, however, and in December 1932 Hindenburg set aside Papen and replaced him with Gen. Kurt von Schleicher. Papen, who retained some power and influence as a vice-chancellor, persuaded Hindenburg to bring Hitler into the government, thereby creating a coalition with a majority in the Reichstag. Having thus attained his goal of reaching the chancellorship legally, Hitler took office on January 30, 1933. The democratic interlude of the Weimar Republic was effectively at an end.
In the coalition cabinet, the Nazis held only 3 out of 11 seats. They had Hitler as chancellor, Wilhelm Frick as Reichsminister of the interior, and Hermann Göring as a Reichsminister without portfolio. Notably, Göring also became the minister of the interior for Prussia, a position he used to Nazify the largest police force in Germany and establish the Gestapo. The ministry of economy and that of food and agriculture, both in the Reich and in Prussia, were held by the Nationalist Hugenberg. The foreign ministry was held by Konstantin, Freiherr (baron) von Neurath, a career diplomat of conservative views, while the ministry of defense was led by Gen. Werner von Blomberg. As vice-chancellor, Papen claimed the right to be present on all occasions when the chancellor saw the president, and, as Reich commissioner for Prussia, he controlled the principal administrative machine in Germany. In this way Papen believed that he had effectively blocked any threat of extremist action by the Nazis. He was soon to be disillusioned.
Hitler’s first step was to persuade the cabinet to agree to new elections in order to provide a majority in the Reichstag. He overcame their doubts with a categorical promise that, whatever the results, no change would be made in the composition of the coalition. The elections were fixed for March 5, 1933, and the Nazis made full use of the power that they now possessed over the apparatus of the state, including the radio, to launch a whirlwind campaign. Although the other parties were still allowed to function formally, their meetings were broken up, their speakers assaulted, and their newspapers continually suppressed. Göring, in control of the Prussian police force, displayed great energy in carrying out a purge that placed the force under Nazi control. In addition, he called up 50,000 auxiliary police, the majority of them SA (Sturmabteilung) and SS (Schutzstaffel). The police were forbidden to interfere with the many acts of intimidation carried out by the SA who were given the “freedom of the streets.”
