United Provinces of Central America, Spanish Provincias Unidas De Centro-américa,   (1823–40), union of what are now the states of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua.
Since the 1520s these regions, along with the Mexican state of Chiapas, had composed the captaincy general of Guatemala, part of the viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico). In 1821 they became independent from Spain, and in 1822 they were joined to the ephemeral empire of Mexico, ruled by Agustín de Iturbide. Following Iturbide’s abdication in March 1823, delegates from the Central American provinces, representing mostly upper-class creoles, assembled at Guatemala City in July to declare themselves completely independent and to form a federal republic—the United Provinces of Central America. They drew up a constitution that provided for a federal capital in Guatemala City and a president for each of the five constituent states, which were to enjoy complete local autonomy; suffrage was restricted to the upper classes, slavery was abolished, and the privileges of the Roman Catholic church were maintained. Manuel José Arce was elected first president in 1825.
Liberal-Conservative dissensions developed and soon erupted into civil war; the Liberals gained control in 1830, when their leader, Francisco Morazán, was elected president. His administration quickly disestablished the church and passed a series of anticlerical laws; other measures were enacted to promote trade and industry. In 1834 Morazán moved the capital of the foundering federation from Guatemala City, a Conservative stronghold, to San Salvador.
After an outbreak of cholera in 1837, which the clergy blamed on the “godless” Liberals, the Conservatives incited an Indian revolt. A mestizo rebel leader, Rafael Carrera, seized Guatemala City in 1838, whereupon most of the member states went their own ways. By April 1839, only El Salvador remained loyal. Morazán, after a disastrous defeat at the hands of Carrera in March 1840, resigned his office.
About 25 abortive attempts were made to restore the union. In the 19th century the Guatemalan government tried many times to gain hegemony over the other Central American states by force. Carrera, who controlled the Guatemalan government until his death in 1865, interfered frequently in El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua by installing conservative regimes. Justo Rufino Barrios, Guatemalan president from 1873 to 1885, urged in 1882 that the old federation be revived; in 1885 he declared himself its ruler and marched his army into El Salvador, where he was defeated and killed at the Battle of Chalchuapa (April 2).
