Valparaíso,  city, capital of Valparaíso región, central Chile. It lies on the south side of a broad, open bay of the Pacific Ocean, 84 miles (140 km) northwest of the national capital of Santiago. The city stands on the slopes of a semicircular spur of the coastal mountain range that ends in the rocky peninsula of Point Angeles. This point affords good shelter to the bay from southerly and westerly winds but leaves it open to those from the north. The historic quarter of the city was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2003.
Valparaíso was founded in 1536 by a conquistador, Juan de Saavedra, who named it for his birthplace in Spain, although another version suggests that Juan Bautista Pastene’s soldiers called the place Val del Paraíso, which eventually became Valparaíso. 
Colonial buildings have survived a succession of pirate raids, severe storms, fires, and earthquakes. Much of the city was rebuilt after a devastating earthquake in 1906. Many buildings were again heavily damaged in the 1971 and 1985 earthquakes, and in 2010 the city once more sustained earthquake damage. After Chilean independence in 1818 and the final breaking of the Spanish mercantile monopoly, the port developed with the birth and evolving power of the Chilean navy and the links created by steamship service to Europe. Although Valparaíso has long been one of Chile’s largest cities, its population grew relatively slowly during the mid- and late 20th century and even tended to decrease as inhabitants moved to Quilpue and Viña del Mar, the adjacent tourist resort that gradually evolved into a residential suburb.
The commercial quarter of Valparaíso, with its port works, warehouses, banks, and shopping centre, occupies reclaimed land adjacent to the bay, as do the administrative buildings grouped around the Plaza Sotomayor. The cathedral, parks, boulevards, theatres, cafés, and a few colonial buildings, notably the church of La Matriz, are also concentrated in this lower part of the city. The Chilean naval academy buildings and residential quarters are located on the steep slopes and valleys of encircling hills, with an agglomeration of poorer dwellings occupying the highest parts. Funicular railways, elevators, stairways, and zigzag roads connect the lower city with the upper.
Chile’s bicameral parliament, the National Congress, has been situated in Valparaíso since it was reestablished in 1990. Valparaíso is preeminently a commercial and industrial centre, however. It has foundries as well as factories that produce chemicals, textiles, sugar, paints, clothing, leather goods, and vegetable oils. An oil refinery is at nearby Concón on the mouth of the Aconcagua River. Most of Chile’s imports enter through the container port; and, although its exports are a small fraction of the Chilean total, its significance in the country’s internal maritime communications is paramount. It is a terminal and major port of call for several international shipping lines.
Valparaíso is also a cultural centre and is the site of the famed Federico Santa María Technical University (established 1926), the Catholic University of Valparaíso (1928), the University of Valparaíso (1981), and the Natural History and Fine Arts museums.
State railways connect Valparaíso with Santiago, to the southeast, and with all the important cities and ports of Chile from Pisagua to Puerto Montt. Good highways run to the resort towns north and south and to Santiago. Another highway crosses the Andes Mountains to connect Valparaíso with Mendoza, Argentina. Internal airlines link the city with other parts of Chile. Pop. (2002) city, 263,499; (2017) municipality, 296,655.
