Vindija,  site of paleoanthropological excavations in the Hrvatsko Zagorje region of Croatia, known for Neanderthal remains found there in the 1970s; Neanderthal DNA has since been successfully isolated from some specimens. The Vindija cave also contains a long, rich sequence of artifacts from the Paleolithic Period dating from more than 200,000 years ago to about 10,000 years ago. The late age and the characteristics of some of the fossils and associated artifacts found at Vindija suggest that Neanderthals (Homo neanderthalensis) and early modern humans (H. sapiens) elsewhere in Europe coexisted for a time.
The oldest fossils from the cave date to about 40,000 years ago and consist of immature and adult pieces of braincase, browridge, upper and lower jaws, isolated teeth, and limb bones. They exhibit a suite of typically Neanderthal skull and dental features and a few aspects of the limb bones. However, despite having body sizes similar to other Neanderthal specimens, these individuals have rather small faces. Also, the browridges are relatively thin and are less projecting than those of other Neanderthals, the jaws are small and exhibit incipient chins, and the shoulder joints closely resemble those of more-recent humans. This evidence indicates a reduction of Neanderthal features in these relatively late central European Neanderthals and thus lessens their contrast with early modern humans in the region.
The more-recent fossils exhibit similar reduction of the brow and lower jaw while retaining several typical Neanderthal features of the face, teeth, and limbs. However, like the Neanderthal remains found at Saint-Césaire in France, they are associated with evidence of a technology normally associated with early modern humans. Moreover, these remains have been directly dated to about 34,000 years ago, which makes them among the most recent Neanderthals known. Their age also means that they were contemporaneous with early modern humans known from neighbouring areas of eastern Europe. This indicates that, when early modern humans spread westward across Europe sometime after about 36,000 years ago, they did not quickly drive the Neanderthals to extinction but lived in neighbouring regions for several millennia. Some scientists suggest that cultural differences between the two groups must therefore have been modest and that there was ample opportunity for them to exchange mates where they came into contact. Others assert that the groups did not interbreed.
