Aegina, Modern Greek Aíyina,  island, one of the largest in the Saronic group of Greece, about 16 miles (26 km) south-southwest of Piraeus. With an area of about 32 square miles (83 square km), it is an eparkhía (eparchy) of the nomós (department) of Piraeus. The northern plains and hills are cultivated with vines and olive, fig, almond, and pistachio trees, while along the east coast stretches a ridge of light volcanic rock known as trachyte. The highest point is conical Mount Áyios Ilías (ancient Mount Pan Hellenion), at 1,745 feet (532 metres). On the west coast the chief town and port, Aegina, lies over part of the ancient town of the same name.
Inhabited since Neolithic times (c. 3000 bce), the island became a leading maritime power after the 7th century bce because of its strategic position, and its silver coins became currency in most of the Dorian states. Aegina’s economic rivalry with Athens led to wars and to its close collaboration with Persia, but at the Battle of Salamis (480 bce) the island sided with Athens and prevailed. The conspicuous bravery of the tiny Aeginetan contingent (only about 40 ships) was recognized by a prize for valour. Hostility with Athens was later resumed, and at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War the Athenians deported all of Aegina’s population and replaced them with Athenian settlers (431 bce). The Spartans settled the refugees in the region of Thyreatis in northern Laconia. The remnants were allowed to return from exile in 404 bce after the defeat of Athens, but Aegina never recovered from the blow. It fell with the rest of Greece to Macedon and then to the Romans in 133 bce. It regained some prosperity under Venice (1451) but was eclipsed by a pirate raid in 1537. From that time, except for another Venetian interlude, the island remained in Turkish hands until 1826, by which time it was again a modestly successful commercial centre. It was chosen as the temporary capital of independent Greece (1826–28), but afterward the increasing concentration of business in Athens forced a gradual decay. Today it is a holiday and weekend resort for Athenians, and the ancient pottery trade is still carried on.
Aegina’s period of glory was the 5th century bce, as reflected by the legacy of sculpture and the poetry of Pindar. A well-preserved 5th-century-bce temple to Aphaea, the ancient Aeginetan deity related to the Cretan Britomartis (Artemis), is situated on a wooded crest in the east of the island. Its Doric peripheral construction (having columns surrounding the building) of local gray limestone has been partially restored.
