Ambon, formerly Amboina or Amboyna,  island and municipality of Maluku propinsi (or provinsi; province), Indonesia. It is one of the islands of the Moluccas (Maluku) group.
Ambon island is located 7 miles (11 km) off the southwestern coast of the island of Ceram (Seram). Its relief is generally hilly, with Mount Salhatu rising to 3,405 feet (1,038 metres). Although subject to earthquakes, Ambon has no active volcanoes, but it does have some hot springs and hot-gas vents, or solfataras. It has a tropical climate with an abundant rainfall. The hard and knotty Ambon wood, of great value for ornamental woodwork, is obtained from Ceram. There are few mammals indigenous to Ambon, but birds include a racquet-tailed kingfisher, a crimson lory, and a vivid crimson brush-tongued parrot. Many varieties of fish live in Ambon Bay, whose eastern end contains some marine gardens.
Ambon’s clove trade first attracted the Portuguese, who named the island and founded a settlement in 1521. The Dutch captured the Portuguese fort in 1605, took over the spice trade, and in 1623 destroyed a British settlement in the Amboina Massacre. The British took it in 1796, and after it had exchanged hands twice between the British and Dutch, it was restored finally to the latter in 1814. An important naval base, Ambon was occupied by Japan during World War II. In 1950, after Indonesian independence, the Ambonese—many of whom had been educated in Christian schools and served in the Dutch administration and army—found their new social and economic prospects unpromising; they refused to join the unitary Republic of Indonesia and proclaimed an independent South Moluccan Republic. The movement was suppressed by military action, though guerrilla warfare continued in Ceram for more than a decade, and many Ambonese fled to the Netherlands.
The Ambonese are mainly Melanesian; they also live in the Uliasers and on the nearby Ceram coast. The Muslims generally live in the north, and the Christians, in the majority and overwhelmingly Protestant, the south. The language, related to Timorese, serves as a regional lingua franca: it is of the Indonesian family, with many Portuguese and Dutch loanwords.
Agricultural production, generally insignificant, includes corn (maize), coffee, root crops, sago, and cloves. Copra, sugar, and fish are exported, and palm wine is made. Ambon’s port is the chief centre for shipment of produce and for distribution of imports. The island has adequate local roads, a government radio station, a telephone system, and Pattimura airport (on the western side of the harbour). Cultural amenities include Universitas Pattimura Ambon (1956), a religious college, and a museum.
The port city of Ambon, on Laitimor Peninsula on the eastern side of the bay, is about 8 miles (13 km) from the harbour’s outer entrance. The capital of Maluku province, it was known under the Dutch for its wide, tree-lined streets; stone houses; and imposing public buildings, including a hospital, a church dating from earliest settlement, and Fort Victoria, built in the early 17th century and later restored. Much of this, including government buildings and barracks, was destroyed in World War II and the following years. Since 1999, fighting between Christians and Muslims on Ambon has produced a mass exodus of Muslims, primarily to Buton in Celebes (Sulawesi), and an influx of Christians fleeing conflict in other parts of central Maluku, such as Ceram, Buru, and Sula islands. Area island, 294 square miles (761 square km). Pop. (2000) city, 156,042; (2010) city, 305,984.
