Cebu,  island, central Philippines. It is the centre of Visayan-Cebuano culture and has preserved a strong Spanish tradition in its cultural life. Attracted by the island’s focal position, the Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan landed there and converted the ruler and chiefs to Christianity. He later was killed on nearby Mactan Island. There are numerous relics of the event in Cebu City.
The island of Cebu is 122 miles (196 km) long; nowhere does it exceed 20 miles (32 km) in width. The surrounding waters are the Visayan Sea (north), Tanon Strait (west), Bohol Strait (southeast), and Camotes Sea (east). Bisected by a range of low volcanic hills, the island has very little level land except for the Bogo Plain in the far north, which is mainly a commercial sugarcane area. There are few harbours, and the settlement pattern is one of numerous small agricultural villages that grow corn (maize), coconuts, yams, agave, and tobacco. Cebu suffers from both overpopulation and soil depletion. There was extensive timber cutting for the building of Spanish galleons on the historic sea route between Manila and Acapulco (Mexico), and the land was further impaired by the erosive powers of the island’s short, rapid rivers and by poor agricultural methods. Central Cebu National Park (1937), encompassing a triangular area (38,049 acres [15,394 hectares]) between Balamban, Toledo, and Cebu City, constitutes the only remaining forest on the island. The island also has a game and bird sanctuary.
Cebu was probably the first Philippine island to cultivate corn on a widespread basis after that plant’s introduction by the Spaniards. Coarse-ground corn remains the staple food, though grain is imported from Mindanao, for Cebu is not agriculturally self-sufficient. Cebu’s manufacturing industries are limited primarily to food processing. Coal, copper, limestone, gold, and silver are mined in the central hill country of the island. In addition to Cebu City, the major settlements on Cebu are Danao, Lapu-Lapu (formerly Opon), Toledo, and Mandaue. Numerous locations in northern Cebu were severely damaged by Super Typhoon Haiyan, a powerful tropical cyclone that swept through the central Philippines in early November 2013. Area 1,707 square miles (4,422 square km). Pop. (2000) Cebu and smaller adjacent islands, 3,356,137; (2010) 4,167,320.
