Ellis Island,  island in Upper New York Bay, formerly the United States’ principal immigration reception centre. Often referred to as the Gateway to the New World, the island lies about 1 mile (1.6 km) southwest of Manhattan Island, New York City, and about 1,300 feet (400 metres) east of the New Jersey shore. Originally only 3 acres (1.2 hectares) in  area, it grew to 27 acres (11 hectares) through extensive land reclamation projects; much of the island’s current area consists of landfill, and ships dumped ballast there for a time.
The island was named for Manhattan merchant Samuel Ellis, who owned it in the 1770s. In 1808 the state of New York sold the island to the federal government, and it was used as a fort and a powder magazine. It served as the nation’s major immigration station from 1892 to 1924, after which its role was reduced; during that period an estimated 12 million immigrants passed through Ellis Island, where they were processed by immigration authorities and obtained permission to enter the United States. A fire in 1897 razed the original wooden buildings, and all records were lost. The U.S. Treasury rebuilt the processing centre in fireproof materials, and in 1900 the new main building was opened. Most first- and second-class passengers who sailed in were checked only briefly on board their ships and were allowed straight into the city, the assumption being that they had sufficient means to prevent them from becoming a public charge. It was primarily the third-class passengers who had medical and legal checks. The inspection process lasted three to five hours and took place in the Great Hall.
After immigration reception was moved to New York City proper in 1943, Ellis Island continued to serve as a detention station for aliens and deportees until 1954 and was reopened to sightseers in 1976 by the National Park Service. The Main Building and other structures on the island were restored in the 1980s and opened in 1990 as the Ellis Island Immigration Museum.
The jurisdiction of the island, which lies in New Jersey waters but traditionally has been considered a part of New York City, became the source of a long-running dispute between New Jersey and New York. An agreement between the two states in 1834 gave sovereignty of what was then a 3.3-acre (1.3-hectare) island to New York. In 1998 the U.S. Supreme Court allowed New York to retain this area but awarded sovereignty of the remainder of the island—composed of the landfill added after 1834—to New Jersey.
