Hawaii, Hawaiian Hawai‘i,  volcanic island, Hawaii, U.S. It lies southeast of Maui island and constitutes Hawaii county. Known as the Big Island, it is the southeasternmost and largest of the Hawaiian Islands. Its area of some 4,030 square miles (10,438 square km) continues to grow as Kilauea, the world’s most active volcano, continues to pour lava into the ocean. The island is formed by five volcanoes (Hualalai, Kilauea, Kohala, Mauna Kea, and Mauna Loa) that are connected by lava saddles (ridges) and is the youngest island geologically of the Hawaiian Islands. Mauna Loa (13,677 feet [4,169 metres]), located some 25 miles (40 km) west of Kilauea, is considered the world’s largest volcano; the two volcanoes are the main feature of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, which has been designated a World Heritage site. The island is roughly triangular in shape. Its highest point, Mauna Kea (13,796 feet [4,205 metres]), is also the highest point in the state. Hawaii’s varied topography includes misty plateaus, craggy ocean cliffs, tropical coastal areas, lava deserts, and fern and bamboo forests, in addition to the often snow-capped peak of Mauna Kea. The volcanoes form an effective barrier to the moisture-laden trade winds and thereby make the western side of the island the driest region in Hawaii.
Polynesians (Marquesas Islanders) are believed to have first reached the island they named Hawai‘i by outrigger canoe as early as 400 ce. A second wave of settlement followed in the 9th or 10th century. The Big Island was the site of the first luakini heiau (a ceremonial structure used for worship and for human sacrifice). There too, centuries later, Kamehameha I, who is considered one of the greatest Hawaiian kings, came to power and established a dynasty. Captain James Cook visited in 1778, and he died on the Big Island in 1779.
Hilo, the county seat, is on the east-central coast. Other important villages are Kailua-Kona, Honaunau, and Waimea. Cattle ranching contributes to the economy, and leading agricultural products include orchids, coffee, and macadamia nuts. Other crops include papaya, avocados, guava, mangoes, taro root (used to make poi, a Hawaiian staple), and sweet potatoes. A popular tourist destination, the island is known for its black sands and numerous state parks and recreational areas. Such areas include Akaka Falls, Rainbow Falls, and Lava Tree state parks and Pu‘uhonua O Honaunau (where ancient Hawaiians went to seek pu‘uhonua [Hawaiian: “refuge”]) and Kaloko-Honokohau (the site of traditional Hawaiian villages) national historical parks, as well as natural features such as Laupahoehoe Point. Waipio Valley’s high cliffs, which feature spectacular waterfalls, are popular with rock climbers. The Mauna Kea Observatory is operated by the University of Hawaii. Also noteworthy are the Puako petroglyphs north of Kona and the Puu Loa petroglyphs in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The Big Island is not considered to be one of the better islands for surfing; one of the better-known surfing spots, called Drainpipes, was destroyed by lava flow in 1990.
