Isle of Anglesey, Welsh Ynys Môn, Latin Mona,  county, northwestern Wales, separated from the North Wales mainland by the Menai Strait. The county encompasses Anglesey island—the largest island in England and Wales, with an area of 261 square miles (676 square km)—and Holy Island, adjoining just west of Anglesey. Isle of Anglesey county is coterminous with the historic county of Anglesey (Sir Fon). The highest point in the county is Holyhead Mountain, with an elevation of 720 feet (219 metres), on Holy Island. Anglesey island has low relief, with a series of low ridges and valleys running from northeast to southwest. Llangefni is the administrative centre for the county.
Anglesey island is known for its ancient history and its prehistoric and Celtic remains. It is low and fertile, in contrast to the mountainous North Wales mainland, and hence it was an early grain-growing and stock-raising centre. Seafaring and fishing were also significant; trading contacts with Ireland were established early, and the island lay on a prehistoric sea route linking the Mediterranean with northern countries. Megalithic burial chambers and standing stones indicate late Neolithic and early Bronze Age habitation. By 100 bce the islanders had adopted Celtic language and culture. Anglesey became a famous Druid centre and a stronghold of resistance to the Romans; Suetonius Paulinus invaded in 61 ce, slaying Druid priests and destroying sacred groves, and Agricola completed the conquest in 78. Early Celtic Christian churches and monasteries on Anglesey include Penmon Priory, founded by St. Seiriol in the 6th century. Aberffraw, on the southwest coast, was the capital of the Gwynedd princes from the 7th to the 13th century. Highly exposed to invasion from the sea, the island was attacked by Irish, Saxon, Viking, and Norman venturers. It was finally subdued by the English king Edward I, who built the castle at Beaumaris (begun 1295).
Isle of Anglesey county remains predominantly agricultural, but tourism has become important. The main town on Holy Island is Holyhead. Area county, 275 square miles (711 square km). Pop. (2001) county, 66,829; (2011) county, 69,751.
