Isle Royale,  centre of a wilderness archipelago and the largest island in Lake Superior, northwestern Michigan, U.S. Administered as part of Keweenaw county, it lies 56 miles (90 km) from the Upper Peninsula shore and 15 miles (24 km) from the Canadian shore and is 45 miles (72 km) long and 9 miles (14 km) across its widest point. Isle Royale National Park, authorized in 1931 and established in 1940, encompasses the island itself and numerous surrounding islets and rocks. The park’s surface area, four-fifths of which is water, is 893 square miles (2,313 square km). The park became part of the National Wilderness Preservation System in 1976, and it was designated a UNESCO International Biosphere Reserve in 1980.
The island probably was visited by the French explorer Étienne Brûlé in 1622, and its early name was Minong (Chippewa Indian for “Good High Place”); it was renamed by French Jesuit missionaries to honour their royal patrons. Carbon-14 tests indicate that prehistoric copper-mining pits date to some 4,000 years ago. Commercial copper mining was undertaken in the mid and late 19th century, and the waters around the island were commercially fished in the 19th century. By the beginning of the 20th century the island had become a popular resort area. Efforts by preservationists in the 1920s led to it becoming a national park.
The island consists of layered basaltic and sedimentary rock sculpted by glaciers into linear ridges and valleys. There are many lakes and streams. Chlorastrolite, a greenstone found there, is the Michigan state gem. Hundreds of species of plants grow on the island, including many that are threatened or endangered. Various types of coniferous and deciduous trees provide an outstanding example of forest transition between boreal (taiga) and temperate; wildflowers, ferns, lichens, mosses, and fungi abound. A variety of small fur-bearing mammals inhabit the island. Moose began populating it in the early 20th century, either traversing the ice or swimming from the Canadian mainland; they exist in a dynamic relationship with their predator, the gray (timber) wolf. More than 200 kinds of birds, including herring gulls, warblers, and loons, visit the island and its waters. Its streams and inland lakes contain pikes, perch, and other game fish.
Travel on Isle Royale is possible only on foot or by boat. Surrounding the island is a collection of well-preserved shipwrecks, which are accessible to scuba divers. Ferry service from the Upper Peninsula is available from Houghton and Copper Harbor or from Grand Portage, Minnesota. Seaplane service also is available from Houghton.
