Johnston Atoll,  unincorporated territory of the United States in the central Pacific Ocean, about 825 miles (1,330 km) southwest of Honolulu. It consists of four small islands on a raised coral atoll formation that are partially enclosed on the north and west by a 7.5-mile (12-km) semicircular reef. Two of the four—Johnston and Sand islands—are natural, and the other two are man-made by dredging. The islands’ combined land area is about 1.1 square miles (2.8 square km), Johnston Island constituting the vast bulk of the total. Rainfall is sparse, and there are no sources of fresh water. Vegetation is limited to bunchgrass, herbs, and some introduced palm trees. The surrounding waters are home to a large variety of fishes and to other marine animals such as green sea turtles; in addition, vast numbers of seabirds visit the islands.
The uninhabited atoll was discovered in 1796 by an American ship, which ran aground there. Sighted in 1807 by an English mariner, Captain C.J. Johnston, the islands remained unclaimed until 1858, when both the United States (under the Guano Act of 1856) and the Kingdom of Hawaii laid claim. The islands’ guano deposits were worked until the early 20th century. Declared a bird sanctuary in 1926 under the administration of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the atoll was placed under the U.S. Navy in 1934. By 1941 a naval air station had been built, the landing strip taking up almost the full length of Johnston Island. Over the years, the military enlarged both Johnston and Sand islands by dredging and grading, in addition to creating the two small artificial islands. Johnston was transferred to U.S. Air Force jurisdiction in 1948 and was associated with U.S. nuclear weapons tests until 1962. The atoll subsequently became a storage facility for chemical weapons, and it was managed by the Defense Nuclear Agency (now part of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency) from 1974 to 1999, when the U.S. Air Force resumed control. A facility for incinerating U.S. chemical weapons stockpiles operated on Johnston Island from the early 1990s to 2000, after which all facilities on the atoll were dismantled and all military personnel (the islands’ only inhabitants) removed. In 2004 Johnston Atoll was decommissioned as a military installation, and it was named a U.S. National Wildlife Refuge. In 2009 it was designated part of the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument.
