Kauai, Hawaiian Kaua‘i,  volcanic island, Kauai county, Hawaii, U.S. It lies 72 miles (116 km) northwest of Oahu island across the Kauai Channel. The northernmost and geologically the oldest of the major Hawaiian islands, it is also the most verdant and one of the most scenic and is known as the Garden Isle; the name Kauai is of uncertain origin. The nearly circular island is dominated by Mount Waialeale, rising to 5,243 feet (1,598 metres) at the island’s centre. The mountain slopes are dissected by fertile valleys and deep fissures, and the island is fringed in coastal areas by marginal lowlands. Waialeale’s summit is considered one of the wettest places on Earth, averaging some 450 inches (11,430 mm) of rain annually. Kauai has Hawaii’s only consistently navigable rivers.
The first Polynesians to reach the Hawaiian Islands are said to have landed at Kauai a millennium ago and settled at the mouth of the Wailua River. The mythical people known as the menehune (“little people”) are said to have constructed some of the island’s landmarks, notably a 900-foot (275-metre) stone wall that impounds the 1,000-year-old Menehune Fishpond (also called Alekoko) at Niumalu, near Lihue. The island was the site of the first Hawaiian landing (1778) of the English explorer-navigator Capt. James Cook. Kauai and the small island of Niihau to the west were the only Hawaiian islands to resist conquest by King Kamehameha I in the late 18th century, although they were unified with the rest of Hawaii in 1810 through peaceful negotiations.
Cities include Lihue, which is the island’s chief port and business centre, in the southeast, and Kapaa, on the east-central coast. Sugar was formerly the main agricultural product, but production ceased in the early 21st century after a decades-long decline. Tourism is now the main economic activity. There is diversified manufacturing, especially of tourist-oriented goods. Coffee also contributes to the economy. The island’s primary airport is in Lihue.
Notable museums, concentrated in Lihue, include the Kauai Museum, which features the work of local artists and exhibits on Hawaiian history, and the Grove Farm Homestead Museum, a historic sugar plantation. On the west side of the island is Waimea Canyon, known as the “Grand Canyon of the Pacific,” some 14 miles (23 km) long, 1 mile (1.6 km) wide, and up to 3,600 feet (1,100 metres) deep. Other attractions include Huleia and Kilauea Point national wildlife refuges, Russian Fort Elizabeth State Historical Park (built 1816), and Kilauea Lighthouse, which contains the world’s largest (although now inactive) lighthouse clamshell lens. Kauai is home to three properties of the National Tropical Botanical Garden, chartered by the U.S. Congress in 1964: Limahuli Garden and Preserve, on the north shore, and Allerton Garden and McBryde Garden, located along the southern shore. The island’s lush vegetation and fine beaches have made it a setting for numerous films and television shows. Kauai county also includes Niihau island (70 square miles [180 square km]) and the tiny uninhabited islets of Kaula and Lehua; privately owned Niihau is known as the “Forbidden Island” because access is greatly restricted, and it is home to a small traditional Hawaiian population. Area Kauai island, 552 square miles (1,430 square km). Pop. (2000) Kauai county, 58,463; (2010) 64,529.
