Leyte,  island, one of the Visayan group in the central Philippines, lying east of Cebu and Bohol across the Camotes Sea. It lies southwest of the island of Samar, with which it is linked by a 7,093-foot (2,162-metre) bridge (completed in 1973) across the narrow San Juanico Strait. The Samar and Bohol (Mindanao) seas lie to the north and south, and Leyte Gulf occupies a large basin between eastern Leyte and southern Samar Island.
The island is irregular in shape and has a rugged mountain backbone, which reaches its maximum height at Mount Lobi (4,426 feet [1,349 metres]) in the centre. A complex system of short streams drain northward to Carigara Bay or westward to Leyte Gulf. The mountains are broken by a low gap at the narrowest part of the island, there crossed by a highway. Rolling plains are found in the coastal areas, particularly in the north near Tacloban and Ormoc.
The island was known to 16th-century Spanish explorers as Tandaya. Its population grew rapidly after 1900, especially in the Leyte and Ormoc valleys. In World War II, U.S. forces landed on Leyte (October 20, 1944), and, after the Battle of Leyte Gulf, the Japanese were expelled. Because the availability of land has been exhausted, Leyte has supplied a large number of migrants to Mindanao.
Most inhabitants are farmers. Fishing is a supplementary activity. Rice and corn (maize) are the main food crops; cash crops include coconuts, abaca, tobacco, bananas, and sugarcane. There are some manganese deposits, and sandstone and limestone are quarried in the northwest.
The island has two major cities, Ormoc and the port of Tacloban. Other population centres include Barugo, Carigara, Baybay, Burauen, and Maasin. Tacloban and Ormoc were two of the locales that were hit hardest by Super Typhoon Haiyan, a powerful tropical cyclone that swept through the central Philippines in early November 2013 and devastated large parts of Leyte and other islands. Area 2,785 square miles (7,214 square km). Pop. (2000) including smaller adjacent islands, 1,952,496; (2010) including smaller adjacent islands, 2,183,295.
