Lombok,  island, Nusa Tenggara Barat provinsi (province), Indonesia. It is one of the Lesser Sunda Islands, lying due east of Bali across the Lombok Strait and due west of Sumbawa across the Alas Strait. To the north is the Java Sea, to the south the Indian Ocean.
The island, which has an area of 2,098 square miles (5,435 square km), is divided for nearly its entire length by two mountain chains. The southern chain, a range of limestone hills, reaches an elevation of 2,350 feet (716 metres), but the northern chain rises to Mount Rinjani (12,224 feet [3,726 metres]). None of the small rivers is navigable. Cliffs often rise precipitously from the sea, but there are good anchorages in bays on the western and eastern coasts.
Lombok Strait, which has depths exceeding 3,600 feet (1,100 metres), has been called the edge of the Asian continental shelf, a contention supported by the marked differences between the plant and animal life of Bali and Lombok. Some intermingling of species has taken place, and Lombok has become the beginning of a transitional area in which Asian forms of life are being supplanted gradually by Australian forms. Vegetation includes a great palm, and typical mammals are monkeys, deer, and wild pigs. The island’s diverse birdlife includes large green pigeons, eight kinds of kingfishers, ground thrushes, grass-green doves, little crimson and black flower-peckers, large black cuckoos, king crows, golden orioles, and fine jungle cocks.
The population of Lombok is composed largely of Sasaks of Malay origin, although there are Chinese in the urban area around Mataram, some Balinese in the west, and some Sumbawanese in the east. The Sasak are Muslim, though there is a strong animist element to their religion. Agriculture is by far the dominant occupation, with paddy rice, soybeans, tubers, peanuts (groundnuts), tobacco, coconuts, and vegetables the chief crops. The central lowland strip of the island, between the two elevated coastal areas, is the centre of settlement and rice cultivation. Mataram, the provincial capital, is the largest city. The chief port is Lembar, on the western coast.
As early as 1640 Lombok was under the sultan of Makasar (Macassar). Eventually, the Balinese seized control and established four kingdoms on the island; one of them, Mataram, entered into a contract with the Dutch that lasted from 1843 to 1872, when Mataram’s oppression of the Sasaks and interference in politics on Bali caused the Dutch to step in and, in 1894, eliminate Balinese rule in Lombok and impose direct rule themselves.
