Long Island,  island in the Atlantic Ocean that comprises the southeasternmost part of New York state, U.S. The island lies roughly parallel to the southern shore of Connecticut, from which it is separated to the north by Long Island Sound. Long Island’s western end forms part of the harbour of New York City. The island has four counties; from west to east they are Kings, Queens, Nassau, and Suffolk.
Kings county is the New York City borough of Brooklyn, and Queens county is the borough of Queens. The western half of Long Island is almost entirely given over to the urban and suburban sprawl extending from New York City, but the island’s eastern half is still partly rural in character and is largely composed of flat, fertile farmlands and long, sandy beaches.
Long Island extends 118 miles (190 km) east-northeast from the mouth of the Hudson River. It is 12–20 miles (19–32 km) wide and has an area of 1,401 square miles (3,629 square km). Its eastern end is divided into two narrow peninsulas; the northern peninsula is about 25 miles (40 km) long and culminates in Orient Point, and the southern peninsula is about 40 miles (64 km) long and ends in Montauk Point, Long Island’s eastern extremity. Bays along the island’s northern shore include Flushing, Little Neck, Manhasset, Cold Spring Harbor, Huntington, Smithtown, and Port Jefferson Harbor. Long Island’s southern shore, fronting the Atlantic, is lined by an almost continuous series of sandbars and sandspits that form several embayments, including Jamaica and Great South bays. This ribbon of sand widens at certain points to form little islands, several of which have become popular bathing beaches such as Rockaway Beach, Long Beach, and Jones Beach. The long spit called Fire Island, or Great South Beach, is largely occupied by Fire Island National Seashore.
The island, until settled by Europeans, was inhabited by Native Americans, generally Delaware peoples at the western end and Montauk peoples throughout the rest. It was originally part of the territory administered by the Plymouth Company, and in 1635 its title was presumably conveyed to William Alexander, 1st earl of Stirling, by Charles I. Despite English claims, the island later became part of the territory claimed by the Dutch West India Company. Breuckelen (Brooklyn), Amersfort (Flatlands), Midwout (Flatbush), and Nieuw Utrecht (New Utrecht) were established by the company between 1636 and 1660. Towns founded by English settlers included Southampton (1640), Southold (1640), Hempstead (1644), Gravesend (1645), Flushing (1645), Newtown (1655), and Jamaica (1656). By the Treaty of Hartford (1650) between New Netherland and the New England Confederation, a demarcation line was drawn from Oyster Bay to the ocean, recognizing the island as Dutch to the west and English to the east.
In March 1664 Long Island was part of the area given to James, duke of York (later James II), by Charles II, and in August the English conquest of New Amsterdam and the Dutch territory was effected. Long Island became a part of Yorkshire and was governed by laws that were promulgated at Hempstead in March 1665. The county system was introduced in 1683 with the creation of Suffolk, Queens, and Kings counties. During the American Revolution, Long Island was a hotbed of activity by both loyalists and Patriots, and its coastal area was raided by privateers and military units. The island was a major source of food and wood during the war, and the Battle of Long Island was the first engagement in the campaign of 1776.
The completion of the Long Island Rail Road to Greenport in 1844 enabled the island to become a major market-gardening centre whose produce could be shipped to New York City. Fishing, whaling, and oystering also remained important, but during the second half of the 19th century the island became an attractive recreational area for New York’s wealthy elite. Great estates and mansions were built along the northern shore, and hotels that attracted thousands of summer vacationers were constructed along the southern shore eastward from New York City. Coney Island, Jones Beach, and the many other beaches, harbours, yacht basins, golf courses, and parklands on the island make it a playground for millions of visitors each summer.
New York City’s continual growth during the 20th century caused Long Island’s population to climb precipitously; Nassau and Suffolk counties doubled and quadrupled their populations, respectively, between 1950 and 1970, although they subsequently stabilized. The island was once a major manufacturing centre, notably of aircraft and electrical equipment, but services and light industry have become the economic mainstays. Hundreds of thousands of Long Islanders commute to work in New York City each day. Long Island is served on both its northern and southern shores and through the central part of the island by the Long Island Rail Road, which carries more commuters than any other railroad in the country. A highly developed and efficient system of express highways connects the island to Manhattan and the other boroughs of New York City by several major bridges and tunnels carrying motor-vehicle traffic, as well as rail and subway lines. Pop. (2000) 7,448,618; (2010) 7,568,304.
