Majorca, Spanish and Catalan Mallorca, ancient (Latin) Balearis Major, or Majorica,  island, Balearic Islands provincia (province) and comunidad autónoma (autonomous community), Spain. Majorca is the largest of the Balearic Islands, which lie in the western Mediterranean Sea. It contains two mountainous regions, each about 50 miles (80 km) in length and occupying the western and eastern thirds of the island; the regions are separated by a lowland that terminates in Palma Bay on the south and Alcudia and Pollensa bays on the north. The western mountains are the higher of the two and rise to 4,741 feet (1,445 metres) at Mayor Peak (Puig Major). Precipitous cliffs, often about 1,000 feet (300 metres) high, characterize much of the north coast. The island’s varied landscape includes pine forests, olive groves, steep gullies, intensively terraced slopes, and fertile valleys. The much less rugged hills in the southeast are known for their extensive limestone caves and subterranean lakes. The central lowland, benefiting from the shelter provided by mountains in the northwest, is a rich agricultural zone with a characteristic two-tier cultivation; olives, figs, apricots, oranges, and almond trees form the upper tier, and the lower tier consists of cereals, alfalfa, and legumes.
The island’s fairs and colourful ceremonies (such as those in Pollensa during Holy Week), the mountain scenery, the benign climate, and the island’s rich historical heritage attract thousands of visitors each year. Majorca is rich in prehistoric remains, notably talayots (rough chambered towers of stone), taulas (temples), and burial caves, among the most famous of which are those of San Vicente in the north, whose type and carvings indicate a close relationship to those of southern France, near Arles. At Valldemosa is the monastery where the French writer George Sand stayed and the Polish composer Frédéric Chopin wrote some of his finest mazurkas and preludes.
The island’s economy is based primarily on agricultural products and tourism, but stone quarries (especially of marble), superphosphate works, and light manufactures (including pottery, pearls, glassware, shoes, rugs, and souvenirs) provide some employment. Shipping services connect Majorca with the Spanish mainland and the other Balearic Islands. There is regular air service from Palma, the provincial capital, to a number of foreign cities. Many of the traditional farming communities surrounding Palma have been displaced by hotels, and there has been a great demand for new housing, mainly for tourists. The construction industry has attracted many immigrants to the island. Most of Majorca’s population is concentrated in Palma and in the industrial towns of Inca, Manacor, and Felanitx. Area 1,405 square miles (3,640 square km).
