Pátmos,  island, the smallest and most northerly of the original 12, or Dodecanese (Modern Greek: Dodekánisa), Greek islands. It constitutes a dímos (municipality) in the periféreia (region) of South Aegean (Nótio Aigaío), southeastern Greece. The barren arc-shaped island consists of three deeply indented headlands joined by two narrow isthmuses; its maximum elevation, that of Mount Áyios Ilías (883 feet [269 metres]), is near the centre. Several islets belonging to Pátmos form a semicircle on the east, strongly suggesting that in prehistoric times Pátmos was shattered by the explosion of a giant volcano and is now partially submerged. An ancient acropolis lies on the northern isthmus. Most of the island’s inhabitants live in the elevated town of Khóra (Pátmos) in the south and in the harbour village of Skála on the east coast at the island’s centre.
Successively settled by Dorians and Ionians, Pátmos received scant mention by ancient writers. Under the Romans it was a place for exiles, the most noted of whom was Saint John the Apostle, author of the Fourth Gospel and the Book of Revelation, who according to tradition was sent there about 95 ce.
During the Middle Ages, Pátmos appears to have been deserted, probably because of Saracen raids. In 1088 the Byzantine emperor Alexius I Comnenus granted the island to an abbot, who founded the massive monastery dedicated to St. John at Khóra. Its library contains a celebrated collection of manuscripts and printed books begun by St. Christodoulos. The autonomy of the monastery was confirmed under Venetian rule (1207–1537); during the Turkish occupation (1537–1912) annual tribute was required from the monks. The island yields grapes, cereals, and vegetables, though not enough for domestic needs. Tourism is the main economic activity. Midway between Skála and Khóra is a theological college, near which is a cave wherein St. John is said to have written or dictated the Book of Revelation. Pátmos’s bare, rocky setting frequently appears in paintings of the saint. Collectively, the monastery, cave, and town of Khóra were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1999. Pop. (2001) 3,053; (2011) 3,047.
