Pohnpei, formerly Ponape,  high coral-capped volcanic island, eastern Caroline Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, western Pacific Ocean.
Pohnpei is roughly square in shape; it is well watered and hilly (rising to Dolohmwar, 2,595 feet [791 metres] above sea level) and is surrounded by a barrier reef with many small islets. Its fertile soil and heavy rainfall result in luxuriant tropical foliage, and the island has been called the “garden of Micronesia.” It has mangrove swamps along its coasts and rainforests in the central hilly area. Situated near Pohnpei are the low-lying coral atolls Oroluk, Pakin, and Ant to the west; Ngatik, Nukuoro, and Kapingamarangi to the southwest; and Mokil and Pingelap to the east. Most of the coral atolls are wooded and support coconut palms. The people of the island and its surrounding atolls, with the exception of the Polynesian inhabitants of Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi, are Micronesians.
In the lagoon on the eastern coast of Pohnpei is Nan Madol, or Nanmadol, a group of 92 prehistoric artificial platform islands built in the lagoon and surrounded by man-made canals. Ruins of a town and ceremonial centre of the early 2nd millennium ce include tombs of former kings, belonging, according to tradition, to the Sau Deleur dynasty that once ruled the whole island.
Though Pohnpei was much visited by whalers and traders, it was not until the mid-19th century that Christian missionaries established schools there. Spanish administration was followed by German possession after 1898. The Germans promoted the production of copra. After World War I, Japan was given mandate over Micronesia under the League of Nations, and Pohnpei was made one of the administrative centres. During World War II Pohnpei’s Japanese garrison was bypassed by the Allies and isolated prior to its surrender. The island was part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands from 1947 until the dissolution of the Trust Territory in 1986.
Pohnpei yields a wide variety of tropical products, including copra, breadfruit, taro, trochus shells, and cacao. Rice is grown, pigs and poultry are raised, and fish are caught. The main coastal villages are Kolonia, Madolenihmw, and Rohnkiti. Pohnpei has an international airport and is the site of the College of Micronesia-FSM. Palikir, near Kolonia, is the capital of the Federated States of Micronesia. Total land area 129 square miles (334.1 square km). Pop. (2010) island, 36,196.
