Saint Martin, Dutch Sint Maarten, French Saint-Martin,  island, lying at the northern end of the Leeward group of the Lesser Antilles in the northeastern Caribbean Sea. The island extends about 12 miles (19 km) from north to south and about the same distance from east to west, including a narrow looping sand spit that extends westward from the hilly main part of the island. It rises to a high point at Paradis Peak (1,391 feet [424 metres]) and has an area of 34 square miles (88 square km). The island receives about 45 inches (1,140 mm) of rain annually. The southern third is tied historically and administratively with the Netherlands, the northern two-thirds with France.
The island was sighted on November 11, 1493, by Christopher Columbus, who named it in honour of St. Martin of Tours, whose feast day it was. Valued for its natural lakes of salt, a scarce commodity in Europe, the island changed between Dutch and Spanish hands several times. In 1648 the Dutch returned to the island to find it occupied by the French, with whom they signed a partition treaty. Sugarcane plantations, worked by black slaves (ancestors of most of the present inhabitants), were important for a time but declined in the 19th century.
The Dutch (southern) part of the island, Sint Maarten, has coastal lagoons, salt pans, and sand spits. It became a part of the Dutch West Indies in 1828, and it was one of the original territories of the Netherlands Antilles federation that was established in 1954 and dissolved in 2010. Sint Maarten is now an autonomous state within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The capital is Philipsburg. The economy draws increasingly on tourism, as the government encourages exploitation of the island’s most valuable natural resources—the clean beaches and pleasant climate.
The French (northern) part of the island, Saint-Martin, has beaches and forest-covered hills. It formerly belonged to the French overseas département of Guadeloupe but attained separate status as an overseas collectivity of France in 2007. Tourism developed rapidly in the late 20th century, and Saint-Martin is now a major Caribbean tourist destination. Trade flourishes in Marigot, the capital. Most of the people are of African or mixed African-European heritage. French is the official language, and English is widely spoken.
