Sakhalin Island, also spelled Sachalin, Russian Ostrov Sakhalin, Japanese Karafuto,  island at the far eastern end of Russia. It is located between the Tatar Strait and the Sea of Okhotsk, north of the Japanese island of Hokkaido. With the Kuril Islands, it forms Sakhalin oblast (region).
Sakhalin was first settled by Japanese fishermen along its southern coasts. In 1853 the first Russians entered the northern part. By an agreement of 1855, Russia and Japan shared control of the island, but in 1875 Russia acquired all Sakhalin in exchange for the Kurils. The island soon gained notoriety as a Russian penal colony. As a result of the Russo-Japanese War, Japan in 1905 (Treaty of Portsmouth) gained Sakhalin south of the 50th parallel and gave this part the Japanese name of Karafuto. After the Russian Revolution, the Japanese occupied all of Sakhalin, but they withdrew in 1924; in the following year White Russian forces were driven out of the north by Soviet troops. The Soviet Union regained the southern half of the island in 1945, at the end of World War II, together with the Kurils, and Sakhalin’s entire Japanese population eventually was repatriated.
Sakhalin Island is 589 miles (948 km) long from north to south and about 100 miles (160 km) wide, covering 29,500 square miles (76,400 square km). There is a lowland plain in the north, but most of the land is mountainous, reaching an elevation of 5,279 feet (1,609 m) at Mount Lopatin. Vegetation ranges from tundra and stunted forests of birch and willow in the north to dense deciduous forest in the south. Fishing, mainly of crab, herring, cod, and salmon, is the principal economic activity around the coast. Petroleum and natural-gas extraction in the north, coal mining, and lumbering, including paper production, are the basis of the rest of the economy. The main agricultural activity is livestock raising. Most of the population is Russian; there has been considerable emigration since the 1960s. The major settlement on the island is Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, which is the administrative centre for Sakhalin oblast. On May 28, 1995, a major earthquake struck the island, destroying the town of Neftegorsk and killing some 2,000 persons.
