Ternate Island, Indonesian Pulau Ternate,  one of the northernmost of a line of Indonesian islands stretching southward along the western coast of the island of Halmahera to the Bacan Islands east of the Molucca Sea. Ternate Island lies within the propinsi (or provinsi; province) of North Maluku (Maluku Utara) and is situated 14 miles (23 km) west of Halmahera. Ternate city is the capital and main commercial centre of North Maluku.
The island is dominated by a volcano with three peaks, the highest of which reaches 5,646 feet (1,721 metres). It has suffered from frequent volcanic activity since the 15th century; the worst eruption occurred in 1763. The southern and eastern coasts of Ternate Island have forests and luxuriant vegetation. The people are ethnically mixed but probably largely of Malay ancestry. Most are Muslims, though some are Christians. The island has a language of its own, written using the Arabic alphabet. Rice, corn (maize), sage, coffee, pepper, nutmeg, and fruit are grown. Although once a leading centre of clove cultivation, the island now trades principally in nutmeg and copra.
Ternate was the first part of the Moluccas to accept Islam, and it was an important sultanate from the 15th to the 17th century. The initial Western visitor was Portuguese and came in 1512; other Portuguese followed to ship cloves and construct a fort (1522). In time the people of Ternate conquered the fort and expelled the Portuguese (1574), and in 1606 the sultan signed a treaty with the Dutch and granted them a spice monopoly. Restriction of production to maintain high prices led to revolts in 1650 and 1679 and the end of clove production in the northern Moluccas. The sultan became a vassal of the Dutch East India Company, and the Dutch assumed executive power on the island until the establishment of the Republic of Indonesia after World War II. In the late 1990s violence erupted between Muslims and Christians in the region, causing tens of thousands of Christians to flee Ternate. Their former communities were occupied, in turn, by large numbers of Muslims who had fled similar violence on Halmahera. Area 97 square miles (251 square km). Pop. (2010) Ternate city, 185,705.
