Tínos,  island in the Cyclades (Modern Greek: Kykládes) group of Greek Aegean islands; in antiquity it was known as the “island of the winds,” the modern name being derived from the Phoenician tenok, meaning “snake”; in ancient times it was also called Ophiousa. It constitutes a dímos (municipality) and perifereiakí enótita (regional unit) in the South Aegean (Nótio Aigaío) periféreia (region). One of the largest of the Cyclades, it is a rugged mass of granite, schist, and limestone. It lies between Ándros, located to the northwest, and Mýkonos (also spelled Míkonos), located to the southeast. It is separated from the former island by a narrow channel. Geologically it is a continuation of Ándros island but is much lower and flatter.
At the beginning of the 10th century bce the island was inhabited mainly by Ionians. It was dominated by Eretria (in the 6th century bce) and was later subject to Rhodes (in the 2nd century bce). The Venetians held it for five centuries after 1207, and the Turks occupied it in 1714, holding it until the Greeks rebelled in 1821.
In antiquity the island was well known for its cult of Poseidon and Amphitrite. With the advent of the Venetians in the 13th century, Roman Catholicism became predominant. Following the discovery of an icon of the Panaýia (Virgin Mary) in 1822 by a nun named Pelagia, Tínos became a major Greek Orthodox place of pilgrimage. The Church of Panayía Evangelistría (Our Lady of Good Tidings) was built in 1822 to house the icon, which is venerated for its healing powers. A road of local marble leads pilgrims for the feasts of the Annunciation and Assumption to this sanctuary.
Agriculture on the terraces found throughout the island includes cultivation of grapes for wine, figs, and vegetables. Tínos is renowned for a bluish marble quarried locally since the 2nd century ce; the Tinians have long had a reputation as skillful artisans in that stone. The local houses are whitewashed and often have dovecotes housing pigeons for domestic consumption. The island is linked to Piraeus, Mýkonos, Rafina, and Ándros by ferry. Pop. (2001) 8,115; (2011) 8,636.
