Torres Strait Islands,  island group in the Torres Strait, north of Cape York Peninsula, Queensland, Australia, and south of the island of New Guinea. The group comprises dozens of islands scattered over some 18,500 square miles (48,000 square km) of water and organized into four geomorphological clusters: Top Western (low and alluvial, near New Guinea); Western (high, rocky, and barren, the largest being Prince of Wales Island); Central (coral); and Eastern (volcanic, with dense vegetation). Generally rich in offshore coral growth and marine fauna, the islands may be remnants of a land bridge that once linked Asia and Australia. They have been inhabited for at least 2,500 years. The present-day inhabitants are primarily of Melanesian origin, with some mixture of Polynesians and Southeast Asians. Culturally, the Torres Strait Islander peoples (see Researcher’s Note: Britannica usage standards: Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islander peoples of Australia) are typically divided into five groups: Top Western, Western, Lower Western, Central, and Eastern. The people of the Eastern Islands speak the Meriam Mir language, and those of the Western Islands and Central Islands speak Kala Lagaw Ya or Kala Kawa Ya, which are dialects of the same language.
Although the Spanish navigator Luis Vaez de Torres sailed through the islands in 1606, they did not become well known until the late 18th century, when fishermen came to hunt for mother-of-pearl shell and bêche-de-mer (sea cucumber). The islands were annexed by Queensland in 1879. At that time, the inhabitants were deprived of their landowning rights. They gained Australian citizenship in 1967. Efforts by islanders to regain their land rights resulted in a lawsuit (popularly called the Mabo case, for Eddie Mabo, the first-named plaintiff) brought by several individuals that was won in the High Court of Australia in 1992; subsequent cases were also settled in favour of other groups of islanders. In 1994 the Torres Strait Regional Authority (TSRA) was established in response to the push for growing local autonomy.
Each island cluster has its own local government and sends representatives to a central council of the TSRA on Thursday Island. Pearl shelling, pearl culture, fishing, and tourism are the main sources of income. With the decline in demand for pearl shell, some of the population has moved to mainland Australia. Pop. (2006) 8,576; (2011) regional council, 4,248.
