Anna Wintour, in full Dame Anna Wintour,  (born November 3, 1949, London, England), British editor who, as the longtime editor in chief (1988– ) of American Vogue magazine, became one of the most powerful figures in fashion.
Wintour was the daughter of Charles Vere Wintour, who twice served as editor of London’s Evening Standard newspaper. She dropped out of North London Collegiate in 1966 and four years later became a fashion assistant for Harper’s & Queen magazine. After working as a fashion editor for a series of New York magazines, she served as editor (1986) of British Vogue and as editor (1987) of House & Garden, which she controversially relaunched in the United States as HG.
In 1988 Wintour replaced Grace Mirabella as editor in chief at American Vogue. The move came three years after the American launch of the French magazine Elle, which consistently threatened to reduce Vogue’s circulation and advertising revenue. In explaining her publishing philosophy of democratic fashion fantasy, Wintour remarked, “Mass with class—that’s my mantra.” Her Vogue covers began featuring prominent women (including actresses Nicole Kidman and Angelina Jolie and politician Hillary Clinton) rather than exclusively using models.
Under Wintour’s direction, Condé Nast Publications—Vogue’s parent company—launched several spin-offs, most notably Teen Vogue (1993). Meanwhile, Wintour orchestrated a spate of high-profile philanthropic Vogue associations, including the transformation of the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art’s annual Costume Institute Ball fund-raising gala (of which she served as cochair) from an elite gathering of Manhattan socialites into an internationally chronicled celebrity-dominated red-carpet event known as the “East Coast’s answer to the Oscars.”
Wintour was instrumental in bolstering the careers of numerous prominent fashion professionals, including the 1990s generation of supermodels, gifted fashion photographer Herb Ritts, and several important designers. Deploying her influence and clout, she secured financial backing for John Galliano’s fledgling eponymous Paris fashion house, a move that helped in his elevation in 1997 to designer in chief at Christian Dior. Alexander McQueen and Marc Jacobs also benefited from Wintour’s patronage. In 2003 she and the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) jointly inaugurated the CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund, which offered financial support and business mentoring to the “next generation” of American fashion designers. After an introduction by Wintour in 2007, the menswear designer Thom Browne successfully launched his collection into 90 Brooks Brothers stores.
In addition to such achievements, Wintour was also known for her imperious demeanour, which was heightened by her propensity to sport dark sunglasses. The Devil Wears Prada (2004), the best-selling novel by Lauren Weisberger that in 2006 was adapted into a popular film starring Meryl Streep and Anne Hathaway, is an account of the comic travails of one of the personal assistants of the fictional fashion magazine editor Miranda Priestly. The Priestly character was widely believed to have been a caricature of Wintour, for whom Weisberger once worked. In 2009 Wintour appeared in The September Issue: Anna Wintour & the Making of Vogue, a documentary film about the creation of the September 2007 issue of the magazine.
Wintour was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2008 and advanced to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 2017. In a move that reflected her wide-ranging influence, in 2013 Wintour became artistic director at Condé Nast. Seven years later she was named the company’s global chief content officer.
