Diana Vreeland, née Diana Dalziel,  (born July 29, 1903, Paris, France—died August 22, 1989, New York, New York, U.S.), American editor and fashion expert whose dramatic personality and distinctive tastes marked her successful leadership of major American fashion magazines during the mid-20th century.
Diana Dalziel was the daughter of a Scottish father and an American mother in whose home the leading artists of the day were frequent guests. In 1914 the family immigrated to the United States to escape World War I and settled in New York City. There Dalziel attended the Brearley School, studied ballet, and lived the life of a debutante. In 1924 she married Thomas R. Vreeland, with whom she lived in Albany, New York, until 1928, in London until 1936, and thereafter in New York City. She became a naturalized citizen in 1925.
In 1936 she began contributing to Harper’s Bazaar a gaily frivolous column called “Why don’t you…?,” which became a highly popular department. In 1939 she joined the Harper’s Bazaar staff full-time and shortly thereafter was appointed fashion editor. She held that post for 23 years, becoming one of the dominant personalities on the magazine and winning acknowledgment as one of the most perspicacious and influential observers of the fashion scene.
In 1962 Vreeland left Harper’s Bazaar and joined the staff of Vogue, of which she became editor in chief in 1963. Under her strong guidance, Vogue soon began to reflect her own taste for the novel, the bizarre, and the outrageous. The youthful and the eccentric were featured, and the photography and design were calculated to reflect the age of youth culture, rock music, and the overthrow of traditional standards. Editorial matter in the magazine often followed her own idiosyncratic style, evident in such statements as “Pink is the navy blue of India.” In particular she created the notion of the “Beautiful People,” a subclass of youthful, wealthy, and footloose members of the less-exclusive international set who were supposed to set the tone of fashion, art, and society.
Vreeland was removed as editor in chief of Vogue in 1971, when the heady fashion excesses of the 1960s had passed. Later that year she was named special consultant to the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (founded in 1937 by Irene Lewisohn). There she mounted a series of exhibitions that attracted a multitude of visitors.
A woman of striking individuality, Vreeland remained the doyenne of American high fashion, receiving numerous honours and awards. She published a book on fashion, Allure, in 1980, and her autobiography, D.V., in 1984. After her death, Vreeland was the subject of the documentary film Diana Vreeland: The Eye Has to Travel (2011), the release of which was accompanied by a coffee-table book of the same name.
