Ellen Browning Scripps,  (born Oct. 18, 1836, London, Eng.—died Aug. 3, 1932, La Jolla, Calif., U.S.), English-born American journalist, publisher, and philanthropist whose personal fortune, accrued from investments in her family’s newspaper enterprises, allowed her to make considerable contributions to educational, public recreational, and medical institutions.
Scripps moved from England to the United States in 1844 with her family. They settled in Rushville, Illinois, where she graduated from the Female Department of Knox College in 1859 and taught in district schools. In 1867 she moved to Detroit, Michigan, to assist her elder brother, James E. Scripps, on his recently acquired and newly merged newspapers, the Daily Advertiser and the Tribune. She later returned home to Rushville to care for her ailing father, but after his death she again joined James, who had just launched the new Detroit Evening News.
In 1878 she helped her younger half brother, Edward W. Scripps, begin his Penny Press in Cleveland, Ohio. She gave financial support and contributed articles and columns to the Penny Press while continuing her work for the Detroit Evening News. She finally abandoned journalistic work in 1883 but continued to invest in Edward’s enterprises as he acquired several more newspapers and laid the foundation of the Scripps-McRae League (later the Scripps-Howard chain). She eventually held large interests in 16 daily newspapers around the country, and the returns on her investments multiplied. In 1891 she settled at Edward’s new villa near San Diego, California, and six years later she built her own villa in La Jolla. She profited further from investments in California real estate.
From roughly 1900 the distribution of her large fortune through carefully planned philanthropy became one of Scripp’s major concerns. The family farm in Rushville, Illinois, was converted into Scripps Memorial Park. In 1903 she and Edward established the Marine Biological Association of San Diego, which in 1912 moved to La Jolla and became a department of the University of California and which is now known as the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. She made large gifts to Knox College and to the Bishops School in La Jolla. With Edward she founded the Scripps Memorial Hospital (later the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation) in La Jolla. She also established Scripps College for Women, which opened in 1927 in Claremont, California, as one of several associated but autonomous colleges, and contributed funds for the establishment of the San Diego Zoo and the development of Torrey Pines Park. Principal among her few personal involvements in public affairs was her service from 1917 as a director of the National Recreation Association.
