Advaita, (Sanskrit: “Nondualism”)  one of the most influential schools of Vedanta, which is one of the six orthodox philosophical systems (darshans) of Indian philosophy. While its followers find its main tenets already fully expressed in the Upanishads and systematized by the Brahma-sutras (also known as the Vedanta-sutras), it has its historical beginning with the 7th-century-ce thinker Gaudapada, author of the Mandukya-karika, a commentary in verse form on the Mandukya Upanishad.
Gaudapada builds further on the Mahayana Buddhist concept of shunyata (“emptiness”). He argues that there is no duality; the mind, awake or dreaming, moves through maya (“illusion”); and nonduality (advaita) is the only final truth. That truth is concealed by the ignorance of illusion. There is no becoming, either of a thing by itself or of a thing out of some other thing. There is ultimately no individual self or soul (jiva), only the atman (universal soul), in which individuals may be temporarily delineated, just as the space in a jar delineates a part of the larger space around it: when the jar is broken, the individual space becomes once more part of the larger space.
The medieval Indian philosopher Shankara, or Shankaracharya (“Master Shankara”; c. 700–750), builds further on Gaudapada’s foundation, principally in his commentary on the Brahma-sutras, the Shari-raka-mimamsa-bhashya (“Commentary on the Study of the Self”). Shankara in his philosophy starts not with logical analysis from the empirical world but rather directly with the Absolute (brahman). If interpreted correctly, he argues, the Upanishads teach the nature of brahman. In making that argument, he develops a complete epistemology to account for the human error in taking the phenomenal world for the real one. Fundamental for Shankara is the tenet that brahman is real and the world is unreal. Any change, duality, or plurality is an illusion. The self is nothing but brahman. Insight into that identity results in spiritual release (moksha). Brahman is outside time, space, and causality, which are simply forms of empirical experience. No distinction in brahman or from brahman is possible.
Shankara points to scriptural texts, either stating identity (“Thou art that”) or denying difference (“There is no duality here”), as declaring the true meaning of brahman without qualities (nirguna). Other texts that ascribe qualities (saguna) to brahman refer not to the true nature of brahman but to its personality as God (Ishvara). Human perception of the unitary and infinite brahman as the plural and finite is due to human beings’ innate habit of superimposition (adhyasa), by which a thou is ascribed to the I (I am tired; I am happy; I am perceiving). The habit stems from human ignorance (ajnana or avidya), which can be avoided only by the realization of the identity of brahman. Nevertheless, the empirical world is not totally unreal, for it is a misapprehension of the real brahman. A rope is mistaken for a snake; there is only a rope and no snake, but, as long as it is thought of as a snake, it is one.
Shankara had many followers who continued and elaborated his work, notably the 9th-century philosopher Vachaspati Mishra. Advaita literature is extremely extensive, and its influence is still felt in modern Hindu thought.
