Anarcho-primitivism,  political and ethical movement that combines the political framework of anarchism with the cultural critique provided by primitivism.
In many ways, those outlooks share common ground. Anarchism defies hierarchical power relations, particularly in the political domain, whereas primitivism, in general, challenges the conditions of humanity, the modern way of life, in the civilized world. Each offers critical perspectives on human institutions and the concomitant institutionalization of humanity and Earth’s natural ecosystems. Anarcho-primitivists contend that civilization (which some members of the movement call “the megamachine” or “Leviathan”) acts as the prime engine of alienation from nature and others. Thus anarcho-primitivists seek to live in communities that are in harmony with nature and liberated from the rules of civilization.
Anarcho-primitivists favour small-scale decentralized constructs such as hand tools, minimalist housing, and wild food sources. Anarcho-primitivists  are critical of any large-scale technological system requiring a vast infrastructure, such as power plants, automobiles, and cities themselves. That position is as much about resisting centralized authority, whether in the form of governmental or corporate entities, as it is about reflecting ecological concerns.
Although much emphasis is placed on reconnecting humanity to its past ecological context (which is sometimes called “re-wilding”), anarcho-primitivists make little effort to deny or ignore the technological developments of the past 10,000 years. Anarcho-primitivists assert that individuals should be seeking to de-escalate civilization’s technological momentum and ultimately disengage from its machinery entirely—which includes the abandonment of agriculture for a hunter-gatherer existence and the eventual decrease of the human population to approximately 100 million persons—so that the species can return to living within the planet’s natural rhythms rather than at the expense of them. Given the extreme countercultural nature of such a program, anarcho-primitivism does not have a wide following, and some scholars and adherents thus maintain that anarcho-primitivism has more utility as a critique of modern civilization than as a practical alternative to it.
