Cartesianism,  the philosophical and scientific traditions derived from the writings of the French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650).
Metaphysically and epistemologically, Cartesianism is a species of rationalism, because Cartesians hold that knowledge—indeed, certain knowledge—can be derived through reason from innate ideas. It is thus opposed to the tradition of empiricism, which originated with Aristotle (384–322 bce) and according to which all knowledge is based on sense experience and is therefore (because sense experience is fallible) only probable. In practice, however, Cartesians developed probabilistic scientific theories from observation and experiment, as did empiricists. Cartesians were forced to satisfy themselves with uncertainty in science because they believed that God is omnipotent and that his will is entirely free; from this it follows that God could, if he so wished, make any apparent truth a falsehood and any apparent falsehood—even a logical contradiction—a truth. The human intellect, by contrast, is finite; thus, humans can be certain only of what God reveals and of the fact that they and God exist. Descartes argues that one has certain knowledge of one’s own existence because one cannot think without knowing that one exists; this insight is expressed as “Cogito, ergo sum” (Latin: “I think, therefore I am”) in his Discourse on Method (1637) and as “I think, I am” in his Meditations (1641). In the Meditations, Descartes also argues that because we are finite, we cannot generate an idea of infinity, yet we have an idea of an infinite God, and thus God must exist to cause us to have that idea. He also says that although we have no direct acquaintance with the material world, not even with our own bodies, but only with ideas that represent the material world, we cannot know the material world directly. We know it exists only because God is not a deceiver.
Cartesians adopted an ontological dualism of two finite substances, mind (spirit or soul) and matter. The essence of mind is self-conscious thinking; the essence of matter is extension in three dimensions. God is a third, infinite substance, whose essence is necessary existence. God unites minds with bodies to create a fourth, compound substance, human beings. Humans obtain general knowledge by contemplating innate ideas of mind, matter, and God. For knowledge of particular events in the world, however, humans depend on bodily motions that are transmitted from sense organs through nerves to the brain to cause sensible ideas—i.e., sensations—in the mind. Thus, for Cartesians, knowledge of the material world is indirect.
This dualism of mind and matter gives rise to serious problems concerning causal interaction and knowledge. Given that mind and matter are so radically different, how can the body cause the mind to have sensible ideas? Likewise, how can the mind cause the body to move? How can the mind know the material world by way of sensible ideas, which are mental? In other words, how can ideas represent the properties of material objects, given that mind and matter are essentially distinct? Various lines of Cartesian philosophy developed from different answers to these questions.
Descartes’s philosophy is rooted in his mathematics. He invented analytic geometry—a method of solving geometric problems algebraically and algebraic problems geometrically—which is the foundation of the infinitesimal calculus developed by Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716). The method discussed in his Discourse on Method is basically an extension of analytic mathematical method, which he applies to all branches of science.
The first Cartesians were Dutch and French physicists and physiologists who attempted to explain physical and biological phenomena solely in mechanistic terms—i.e., solely in terms of matter and its motion and especially without appeal to Aristotelian notions such as form and final cause. Descartes’s first disciple in the Netherlands, Henricus Regius (1598–1679), taught Cartesian physics at the University of Utrecht—though, to Descartes’s chagrin, he dismissed Descartes’s metaphysics as irrelevant to science. Another disciple, the French theologian and philosopher Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715), believed with Descartes that animals are merely machines and thus incapable of thought or feeling; he is said to have kicked a pregnant dog and then to have chastised critics such as Jean de La Fontaine (1621–95), the French writer of animal fables, for expending their emotions over such inconsiderable creatures rather than concerning themselves with human misery. In Paris, the lectures of Pierre-Sylvain Régis (1632–1707) on Cartesian physics—which he accompanied with spectacular demonstrations of physical phenomena such as optical illusions—created such a sensation that Louis XIV forbade them. Because Cartesianism challenged the traditional Aristotelian science, which was supported by the Roman Catholic Church, and because the church also stood behind the so-called “divine right” of kings to rule, the king feared that any criticism of traditional authority might give rise to revolution. (Later, in the 18th century, Descartes’s emphasis on the ability of each individual to think for himself lent support to the cause of republicanism.)
Advancements in mechanical arts and crafts provided the practical foundation of Cartesian mechanism. In the 17th century, mechanical inventions such as statues that walked and talked by application of levers and pullies and organs that played by waterpower were well known. The mathematician Blaise Pascal (1623–62) invented a calculating machine based on principles worked out by clock makers and inventors of spinning and knitting machines, such as the Englishman William Lee. The first inventors directly inspired by Descartes were the French craftsman Jean Ferrier, who attempted to make hyperbolic lenses according to Descartes’s designs, and Étienne de Villebressieu, who with Descartes’s collaboration developed an improved water pump.
Mechanism was promoted by one of Descartes’s contemporaries, the mathematician and philosopher Marin Mersenne (1588–1648). Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) attempted to derive it theoretically from the atomism of the ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus (341–270 bce), who held that reality is ultimately constituted of “atoms” in motion in the “void.” Motion was first studied scientifically by the Italian mathematician and astronomer Galileo (1564–1642).
According to Descartes, the material universe consists of an indefinitely large plenum of infinitely divisible matter, which is separated into the subtle matter of space and the denser matter of bodies by a determinate quantity of motion that is imparted and conserved by God. Bodies swirl like leaves in a whirlwind in vortices as great as that in which the planets sweep around the Sun and as small as that of tiny spinning globes of light. All bodily joinings and separations are mechanical, resulting from the collisions of other moving bodies. Because the amount of motion is conserved according to the laws of nature, the Cartesian material world exhibits a kind of determinism. After the initial impulse, the world evolves lawfully. If the speeds and positions of all the whirling portions of matter in the universe at any one moment could be completely described, then a complete description of their speeds and positions at any later time could be deduced through calculations based on the laws of motion. Of course, only God has the infinite intellect required for performing these calculations.
Although God is the primary cause of the existence of the material universe and of the laws of nature, all physical events—all movements and interactions of bodies—result from secondary causes—that is, from bodies colliding with each other. God stands merely for the uniformity and consistency of the laws of nature. This led Blaise Pascal to complain that the only purpose God serves in Descartes’s system is to initiate motion in the material world and to guarantee its conservation and the uniformity of nature.
Cartesianism was criticized in England by the Platonist philosopher Henry More (1614–87) and was popularized by Antoine Le Grand (1629–99), a French Franciscan, who wrote an exposition of the Cartesians’ ingenious account of light and colour. According to popular versions of this account, light consists of tiny spinning globes of highly elastic subtle matter that fly through the air in straight lines and bounce like balls at angles consistent with the optical laws of reflection and refraction. Different colours are caused by the globes’ different speeds and spins, which themselves are determined by the texture of the surfaces on which the globes are reflected, refracted, or transmitted. The spectrum of colours observed when light passes through a triangular prism is explained by the fact that the globes pass more slowly through thicker parts of the prism than they do through thinner ones. The same spectrum of colours occurs when light passes through thicker and thinner parts of raindrops, giving rise to rainbows. Although Newton and  Leibniz later showed that the simple mechanistic principles underlying these accounts were incapable of explaining the forces of gravitation and chemical bonding, it is noteworthy that the Cartesian theory of light is similar in principle to the contemporary view, according to which the different colours are produced by light at different wavelengths.
By the end of the 17th century, most of Cartesian physics had been superseded by Newtonian mathematical physics. Cartesians admitted that Descartes’s laws of motion were wrong and that his principle of the conservation of motion should be abandoned in favour of Newton’s principles of the conservation of energy, or vis viva (Latin: “living force”), and linear momentum. Although the Treatise (1671) of Jacques Rohault, a leading expositor of Cartesian physics, was translated into English in 1723 by Newton’s disciple Samuel Clarke (1675–1729) and Clarke’s brother, their corrections and annotations turned the work into an exposition of Newtonian physics. Nevertheless, this progress would have pleased Descartes, who said that the advancement of scientific knowledge would take centuries of work.
