Condition,  in logic, a stipulation, or provision, that needs to be satisfied; also, something that must exist or be the case or happen in order for something else to do so (as in “the will to live is a condition for survival”).
In logic, a sentence or proposition of the form “If A then B” [in symbols, A ⊃ B] is called a conditional (sentence or proposition). Similarly, “Whenever A then B” {in symbols, (x) [A(x) ⊃ B(x)]} may be called a general conditional. In such uses, “conditional” is a synonym for “hypothetical” and is opposed to “categorical.” Closely related in meaning are the common and useful expressions “sufficient condition” and “necessary condition.” If some instance of a property P is always accompanied by a corresponding instance of some other property Q, but not necessarily vice versa, then P is said to be a sufficient condition for Q and, equivalently, Q is said to be a necessary condition for P. Thus, a severed spinal column is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condition for death; while lack of consciousness is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for death. In any case in which P is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for Q, the latter is also a necessary and sufficient condition for the former, each being regularly accompanied by the other. The terminology is also applicable to logical or mathematical or other nontemporal properties; thus, it is proper to speak of “a necessary condition for the solution of an equation” or “a sufficient condition for the validity of a syllogism.” See also implication.
In metaphysics, the above uses of the term condition have led to the contrast between “conditioned” and “absolute” being (or “dependent” versus “independent” being). Thus, all finite things exist in certain relations not only to all other things but possibly also to thought; i.e., all finite existence is “conditioned.” Hence, Sir William Hamilton, a 19th-century Scottish philosopher, spoke of the “philosophy of the unconditioned”; i.e., of thought in distinction to things that are determined by thought in relation to other things. An analogous distinction was made by H.W.B. Joseph, an Oxford logician, between the universal laws of nature and conditional principles, which, though regarded as having the force of law, are yet dependent or derivative; i.e., cannot be treated as universal truths. Such principles hold good under present conditions but may be invalid under others; they hold good only as corollaries from the laws of nature as they operate under existing conditions.
