Cornucopian,  label given to individuals who assert that the environmental problems faced by society either do not exist or can be solved by technology or the free market. Cornucopians hold an anthropocentric view of the environment and reject the ideas that population-growth projections are problematic and that Earth has finite resources and carrying capacity (the number of individuals an environment can support without detrimental impacts). Cornucopian thinkers tend to be libertarians. Thus, they tout capitalism as an essential feature of human progress and see no moral or practical need for legal controls to protect the natural environment or limit its exploitation. Many arguments in support of the cornucopian position can be traced back to the work of American economist Julian Simon and American futurist Herman Kahn. The term cornucopian is derived from the ancient Greek “horn of plenty.”
Cornucopian thought combines Scottish economist Adam Smith’s “invisible hand” of market self-regulation with a belief that technology can overcome all human problems. Smith used the metaphor of the invisible hand to argue that individuals who pursue their own self-interest in the market are at the same time contributing to societal interests by increasing revenue and economic welfare for the society as a whole. Cornucopians are confident that technology will meet the demand of individuals and society.
A cornerstone argument of the cornucopian position is a denial of English economist Thomas Malthus’s assertion that human population growth will always tend to outrun the supply of food and natural resources. The Malthusian position led Paul Ehrlich to call for population control in the 1960s and ’70s. In his book The Population Bomb (1968), he predicted that millions would starve to death in the late 20th century as a result of overpopulation. Although his assertion did not come to pass, many environmentalists still warn about the negative effects of rapid population growth.
Many cornucopians challenge the notion of a pending Malthusian catastrophe with two primary arguments. The first is a refutation of Malthus’s prediction of exponential population growth. Although the population of the planet did grow rapidly after 1800 because of medical and technological advances, population growth has slowed and evened out over time. The lack of exponential population growth is supported by statistics from international organizations such as the United Nations, which have repeatedly adjusted and lowered their world population predictions.
The second part of the cornucopian dissent has to do with the effects of population growth. Cornucopians note that although population has increased rapidly since 1800, so has the standard of living. Some cornucopians even assert that population growth might actually improve the human condition, given the increase in goods and services over time. In the book Population Matters: People, Resources, Environment, and Immigration (1990), Julian Simon argued that growing prosperity and technology will only increase the amount of resources available, which in turn will raise the standard of living for all.
Cornucopians reject the notion that Earth has finite resources. This directly relates to their stance that technology can regenerate or replace any resources under pressure. One often-used example is the rise of fibre-optic cable as a replacement for metals, especially copper, in communication lines. In their rejection of finite resources, cornucopians also challenge the concepts of carrying capacity and American ecologist Garrett Hardin’s tragedy of the commons. Hardin related carrying capacity to environmental social goods, such as clean air and clean water, and argued that without government regulation, individuals would maximize their own utility and destroy the common goods that are shared by all but owned by no one. Cornucopians reject many of the claims that underlie arguments for environmental protection and government regulation.
Libertarian cornucopians value minimal government intervention and place high importance on individual liberty, which they view as essential to market growth and technological development. Cornucopians see private property as being vital for the market to flourish and claim that the only legitimate role for the government in reference to resources is the protection of private property.
There are several criticisms that have been leveled at the cornucopian worldview. The most common criticism is that cornucopians simply ignore evidence that is contradictory to their position and choose only examples and statistics that already support their perceptions. For example, one argument charges cornucopians with ignoring the effects of population growth on ecosystems, which are essential for the survival of humans. Similarly, some claim that the current standard of living is overstated and ignores the living conditions of the poor around the planet.
