Intentionality,   in phenomenology, the characteristic of consciousness whereby it is conscious of something—i.e., its directedness toward an object.
The concept of intentionality enables the phenomenologist to deal with the immanent-transcendent problem—i.e., the relation between what is within consciousness and what extends beyond it—in a manner different from that employed by many philosophers who have claimed that an experienced, represented, and remembered object (e.g., a tree) is inside consciousness (immanent), whereas the real object itself is outside the mind (transcendent). These philosophers have made this distinction the ground of a doubt about the existence of things and of skepticism about the possibility of knowledge of things.
Phenomenologists have noted that this distinction is a question of meaning and thus pertains to the reflective, or ontological, level; it is a distinction made, however, on the level of the everyday world, that of the natural attitude. Thus, in order to reach the level of meaning, phenomenologists—contrary to these other philosophers—“bracket” existence (i.e., exclude from consideration the question of existence or nonexistence as things) by the phenomenological reduction and deal exclusively with the indubitable—with consciousness and the immediately given evidence of consciousness. On this level, the immanent is what is given adequately (e.g., one sees the front side of the tree) and the transcendent is what is aimed at, or intended (the tree). Thus, the problem of how to move from the immanent to the transcendent is solved by an analysis of how an object comes to have meaning for consciousness and of how consciousness relates to the object. This procedure is called intentional analysis, or the analysis of the constitution of meaning.
Every particular profile of an object refers to, though it does not present, the object as a whole (i.e., as it could be perceived in all of its profiles). Thus, the object as a whole (the intended, or meant, object) is what unifies all of the profiles as given in the many acts of perception. Each perception anticipates the other perceptions, and perception is thus a process of fulfillment. The whole of the factors not effectively or immediately given—i.e., the object in its other profiles—is called the internal horizon, and the background against which the object appears is called the external horizon. Thus, the constitution of the object is the unity of the acts of consciousness, the unity of all of the profiles with the internal horizon, and the external horizon.
