Kantianism,  either the system of thought contained in the writings of the epoch-making 18th-century philosopher Immanuel Kant or those later philosophies that arose from the study of Kant’s writings and drew their inspiration from his principles. Only the latter is the concern of this article.
The Kantian movement comprises a loose assemblage of rather diverse philosophies that share Kant’s concern with exploring the nature, and especially the limits, of human knowledge in the hope of raising philosophy to the level of a science in some sense similar to mathematics and physics. Participating in the critical spirit and method of Kant, these philosophies are thus opposed to dogmatism, to expansive speculative naturalism (such as that of Benedict de Spinoza, the Dutch Jewish rationalist), and, usually, to irrationalism. The various submovements of Kantianism are characterized by their sharing of certain “family resemblances”—i.e., by the preoccupation of each with its own selection of concerns from among the many developments of Kant’s philosophy: a concern, for example, with the nature of empirical knowledge; with the way in which the mind imposes its own categorial structure upon experience, and, in particular, with the nature of the structure that renders human knowledge and moral action possible, a structure considered to be a priori (logically independent of experience); with the status of the Ding an sich (“thing-in-itself”), that more ultimate reality that presumably lurks behind the apprehension of an object; or with the relationship between knowledge and morality.
A system such as the critical philosophy of Kant freely lends itself to reconstructions of its synthesis according to whatever preferences the private philosophical inclinations of the reader may impose or suggest. Kant’s system was a syncretism, or union, of British empiricism (as in John Locke, George Berkeley, and David Hume) that stressed the role of experience in the rise of knowledge; of the scientific methodology of Isaac Newton; and of the metaphysical apriorism (or rationalism) of Christian Wolff, who systematized the philosophy of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, with its emphasis on mind. Thus, it constituted a synthesis of elements very different in origin and nature, which tempted students to read their own presuppositions into it.
The critical philosophy has been subjected to a variety of approaches and methods of interpretation. These can be reduced to three fundamental types: those that conceive of the critical philosophy as an epistemology or a pure theory of (scientific) knowledge and methodology, those that conceive of it as a critical theory of metaphysics or the nature of being (ultimate reality), and those that conceive of it as a theory of normative or valuational reflection parallel to that of ethics (in the field of action). Each of these types—known, respectively, as epistemological, metaphysical, and axiological Kantianism—can, in turn, be subdivided into several secondary approaches. Historically, epistemological Kantianism included such different attitudes as empirical Kantianism, rooted either in physiological or psychological inquiries; the logistic Kantianism of the Marburg school, which stressed essences and the use of logic; and the realistic Kantianism of the Austrian Alois Riehl. Metaphysical Kantianism developed from the transcendental idealism of German Romanticism to realism, a course followed by many speculative thinkers, who saw in the critical philosophy the foundations of an essentially inductive metaphysics, in accordance with the results of the modern sciences. Axiological Kantianism, concerned with value theory, branched, first, into an axiological approach (properly so-called), which interpreted the methods of all three of Kant’s Critiques—Critik der reinen Vernunft (1781, rev. ed. 1787; Critique of Pure Reason), Critik der practischen Vernunft (1788; Critique of Practical Reason), and Critik der Urteilskraft (1790; Critique of Judgment)—as normative disciplines of thought, and, second, into an eclectic or relativistic Kantianism, which regarded the critical philosophy as a system of thought dependent upon social, cultural, and historical conditions. The chief representatives of these submovements are identified in the historical sections below.
It is essential to distinguish clearly between two periods within the Kantian movement: first, the period from 1790 to 1831 (the death of the German idealist G.W.F. Hegel) and, second, the period from 1860 to the present—separated by a time when an antiphilosophical positivism, a type of thought that supplanted metaphysics with science, was predominant. The first period began with the thorough study and emendation of Kant’s chief theoretical work, the Critique of Pure Reason, but it soon became intermingled with the romantic tendencies in German idealism. The second period, called specifically Neo-Kantianism, was first of all a conscious reappraisal, in whole or in part, of the theoretical Critique but was also, as a total system, a reaction against positivism. Earlier Neo-Kantianism reduced philosophy to the theory of knowledge and scientific methodology; systematic Neo-Kantianism, arising at the beginning of the 20th century, expressed itself in attempts at building metaphysical structures.
