Mimamsa, (Sanskrit: “Reflection” or “Critical Investigation”)  one of the six systems (darshans) of Indian philosophy. Mimamsa, probably the earliest of the six, is fundamental to Vedanta, another of the six systems, and has deeply influenced the formulation of Hindu law (see Indian law).
The aim of Mimamsa is to give rules for the interpretation of the Vedas, the earliest scriptures of Hinduism, and to provide a philosophical justification for the observance of Vedic ritual. Because Mimamsa is concerned with the earlier parts of the Vedas (called the Karmakanda), it is also referred to as Purva-Mimamsa (“Prior Study”) or Karma-Mimamsa (“Study of Actions”). Vedanta, which deals with the later portion of Vedic literature called the Upanishads, is called Uttara-Mimamsa (“Posterior Study”) or Jnana-Mimamsa (“Study of Knowledge”).
The earliest work of the system is the Mimamsa-sutra of Jaimini (c. 4th century bce). A major commentary was written by Shabarasvamin (1st century bce?), who was followed by a long line of interpreters and teachers, most notably Kumarila and Prabhakara (7th–8th century ce).
The goal of Mimamsa is to provide enlightenment on dharma, which in this school is understood as the set of ritual obligations and prerogatives that, if properly performed, maintains the harmony of the world and furthers the personal goals of the performer. Since dharma cannot be known through either perception or reasoning, one must depend on revelation in the Vedas, which are considered eternal, authorless, and absolutely infallible.
To find out what one’s dharma is on specific occasions, one must rely upon examples of direct or implicit command in the Vedic text. If the command is implicit, one must judge from parallels; if a text fails to detail how a priest proceeds with an action, this detail must be provided from other texts. This concern with precise statement necessitates meticulous examination of the structure of a sentence conveying a command.
Although it was purely practical in origin, Mimamsa became a powerful intellectual force. Mimamsa, in the person of Kumarila, is traditionally credited with the defeat of Buddhism in India. It has also contributed to the direction, method, and content of Hindu erudition.
