Objectivism,  philosophical system identified with the thought of the 20th-century Russian-born American writer Ayn Rand and popularized mainly through her commercially successful novels The Fountainhead (1943) and Atlas Shrugged (1957). Its principal doctrines consist of versions of metaphysical realism (the existence and nature of things in the world are independent of their being perceived or thought about), epistemological (or direct) realism (things in the world are perceived immediately or directly rather than inferred on the basis of perceptual evidence), ethical egoism (an action is morally right if it promotes the self-interest of the agent), individualism (a political system is just if it properly respects the rights and interests of the individual), and laissez-faire capitalism. Objectivism also addresses issues in aesthetics and the philosophy of love and sex. Perhaps the best-known and most-controversial aspect of objectivism is its account of the moral virtues, in particular its unconventional claim that selfishness is a virtue and altruism a vice.
Rand held that all people, whether they realize it or not, are guided in their thoughts and actions by philosophical principles and assumptions. Philosophy thus has great practical import, and indeed possessing the correct philosophy is essential to leading a successful and happy life. The branches of philosophy that most directly affect everyday life are ethics and political philosophy.
In ethics, Rand held a vaguely Aristotelian theory of virtue based on a teleological conception of living organisms, including humans. A value, according to Rand, is “that which one acts to gain and/or keep.” All organisms act so as to preserve their lives, and life is the only thing that organisms act to keep for its own sake, rather than for the sake of something else. Life is thus the ultimate value for all organisms, not only because all other values are a means to preserving it but also because it sets a standard of evaluation for all lesser goals (and all things generally): that which preserves life is good, and that which threatens or destroys life is evil. Rand understood these claims to apply to organisms individually as well as generically: that which preserves an organism’s life is good for that organism, and that which threatens or destroys it is evil (or bad) for that organism. In this way Rand claimed to have solved the centuries-old “is-ought” problem—the problem of showing how a statement about what ought to be can be logically derived solely from a statement (or statements) about what is.
Rand defined a virtue as “the act [or pattern of acting] by which one gains and/or keeps” a value. Because “reason is man’s basic means of survival,” rationality, the virtue corresponding to the value of reason, is the highest human virtue. Accordingly, the ultimate value for each human being is not his life per se but his life as “a rational being,” which is thus his basic standard of evaluation. What life as a rational being consists in for Rand is a matter of scholarly debate, but it seems to entail dedication to the cardinal values of reason, purpose (purposiveness), and self-esteem and action in accordance with the corresponding virtues of rationality, productiveness, and pride. The consequence and accompaniment of such a life is happiness, the “state of consciousness which proceeds from the achievement of one’s values.”
“Rational selfishness” is the pursuit of one’s own life as a rational being, or (equivalently) the pursuit of one’s own happiness. So understood, selfishness is a fundamental virtue. Objectivist ethics is thus a form of ethical egoism. Conversely, altruism, which Rand characterized as “the placing of others above self, of their interests above one’s own,” is precisely the negation of virtuous activity and is therefore a fundamental vice.
The basic principle of Rand’s political philosophy is that “no man has the right to initiate the use of physical force against others.” She interpreted this “nonaggression principle” to be incompatible with the redistribution of wealth or other social goods or benefits through social welfare programs and most public services, because such institutions rely on the implicit threat of the use of force by the government against those from whom wealth is taken. The proper role of government, according to Rand, is to protect the individual’s inviolable rights to life, liberty, property, and the pursuit of happiness. The only just socioeconomic system is capitalism—“a full, pure, uncontrolled, unregulated laissez-faire”—because only it fully respects the individual’s right to property and is fully consistent with the nonaggression principle.
