Art Hodes,  (born November 14, 1904, Nikolayev, Russia (now Mykolayiv, Ukraine)—died March 4, 1993, Harvey, Illinois, U.S.),  American jazz and blues pianist known for the emotional commitment of his playing. He is regarded by many critics as the greatest white blues pianist, and he was also a noted composer, jazz writer, historian, and teacher.
Hodes’s Ukrainian family came to the United States in 1905 and moved to Chicago when he was a child. He began his musical education in 1916 at Jane Addams’s Hull House, where he often jammed with Benny Goodman and other jazz notables. Throughout the 1920s, Hodes learned from the many greats of jazz who were then in Chicago, including Louis Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton, and King Oliver. He became pianist with the Wolverines in 1926 after the departure of leader Bix Beiderbecke, and he played in the Chicago area throughout most of the 1930s with such musicians as Gene Krupa, Frank Teschemacher, and Bud Freeman. He did not become well known, however, until he moved to New York in 1938 and made some noted recordings with Joe Marsala and Mezz Mezzrow. From 1940 Hodes led many highly regarded small groups, specializing in traditional jazz and blues.
A committed jazz traditionalist, Hodes was often at odds with proponents of the bebop movement in the 1940s. One of his forums was a radio program on WNYC out of New York City. He also published and wrote for the magazine Jazz Record; his columns appear in the collection Selections from the Gutter (1977). He was the first jazz artist to own a record label (also called Jazz Record), for which he made some of his best recordings during the 1940s; also notable are the sessions he undertook for the Blue Note label during 1944 and 1945.
Although known mostly for playing blues, Hodes was also praised for his stomping, two-fisted technique on up-tempo numbers. He excelled as both soloist and band pianist and adapted his playing style to the situation, using his left hand and his boot heel as a rhythm section when playing unaccompanied. As a composer, he was noted for such songs as “Selection from the Gutter,” “Portrait in Blue,” “Southside Shuffle,” and “Plain Old Blues.”
Hodes returned to the Chicago area in 1950 and taught in the suburb of Park Forest for many years. During the 1960s he wrote a monthly column for Down Beat magazine and toured throughout the United States and Europe with his lecture-and-concert program Sound of Jazz. He also hosted a public television series, Jazz Alley, in the 1960s. In the late 1970s and into the ’80s, he had a career renaissance, garnering enthusiastic reviews for his recordings and his nightclub performances in Chicago and New York. He continued to perform until shortly before his death. His autobiography, Hot Man (written with Chadwick Hansen), was published in 1992.
