Erykah Badu, byname of Erica Wright,  (born February 26, 1971, Dallas, Texas, U.S.), American rhythm-and-blues singer whose neo-soul vocals elicited comparisons to jazz legend Billie Holiday.
Badu was the eldest of three children. Although she was never formally trained in music, she majored in dance and theatre at Grambling State University in Louisiana after graduating from the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts in Dallas. She dropped out of Grambling in 1993 to pursue a singing career and formed the group Erykah Free with her cousin while also working as a waitress and a drama teacher. In 1995, while the group was opening for singer D’Angelo, Badu came to the attention of Kedar Massenburg, who was just starting his own record company. Badu disbanded Erykah Free when Massenburg offered her a contract; she thought that she would receive more individual attention as a solo artist at a smaller label. In January 1997 “On & On,” Badu’s first single, was released and quickly became a hit. The next month, her debut album, Baduizm, for which she wrote all but one of the songs, was released. It rose to number two on the Billboard album chart, thanks to the crossover appeal of Badu’s bluesy vocals backed by down-tempo hip-hop beats. Baduizm won the Grammy Award for best R&B album, and “On & On” took the award for best female R&B vocal performance.
Her sound drew from the roots of African American popular music, and she cited among her early influences Miles Davis, Al Jarreau, Chaka Khan, Stevie Wonder, and Marvin Gaye. Badu’s follow-up album, Erykah Badu Live, reached the top five on the Billboard pop charts and yielded the hit song “Tyrone.” The combined sales of the two albums exceeded three million copies, and both efforts were certified as platinum. That year she captured two NAACP Image Awards, four Soul Train Awards, an American Music Award, and two Grammy Awards. Her second album of original material, Mama’s Gun (2000), sold well on the strength of singles such as “Bag Lady,” and she followed with Worldwide Underground (2003), a collection that was marketed as an EP (extended play) in spite of its 50-minute length.
In 2008 she released New Amerykah, Part One: 4th World War, a bass-heavy album that blended elements of funk with Badu’s socially aware lyrics. A flurry of publicity greeted New Amerykah, Part Two: Return of the Ankh upon its release in 2010. The controversial video for that album’s first single, “Window Seat,” featured Badu completely disrobing while she walked through Dealey Plaza in downtown Dallas, the site of the assassination of U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy. For the next several years, Badu continued performing, though her recording activity was limited to guest spots on songs by other artists. In 2015 she released the mixtape But You Caint Use My Phone, on which she adapted a variety of songs about phones and communication. It met with a generally positive reception.
