Sam Smith, in full Samuel Frederick Smith,    (born May 19, 1992, London, England),  British soul singer with a mellifluous voice who was noted for lyrics that subverted the notions of romantic love that defined popular soul music.
Smith was raised in Cambridgeshire, born to a father who was a truck driver and greengrocer and a mother who was a banker. Both parents encouraged Smith’s singing at a young age, after the budding vocalist  impressed them with a rendition of Whitney Houston’s “My Love Is Your Love.” Smith pursued vocal training and soon appeared in local theatre productions and with Youth Music Theatre UK, going through six managers before ultimately moving to London at age 18 to pursue opportunities there.
The first big break came when Smith teamed with house duo Disclosure on the track “Latch,” which featured Smith’s liquid falsetto vocals astride an effervescent electronic beat. That recording was released in 2012 and emerged as a hit. The collaboration landed Smith a record deal. By early 2013 the singer had released “Lay Me Down,” the first single from Smith’s debut album, In the Lonely Hour. Smith’s vocals were also featured on the propulsive electronica track “La La La” (2013), by producer Naughty Boy. The breakout single from In the Lonely Hour, “Stay with Me,” a keening falsetto ballad that wistfully implores a one-night stand for affection, became a radio staple following its release in 2014. Smith cited the influences of singers such as Houston and Aretha Franklin, who both propelled their powerful, soaring voices to the high end of their registers as they evoked love and loss. Those themes defined In the Lonely Hour, an album that Smith, who was homosexual, had composed in the wake of a romantic rejection by a heterosexual man.
The young vocalist steadily accrued accolades for dulcet stylings, earning comparisons to crooners ranging from Frank Sinatra to Adele. At the 2015 Grammy Awards, In the Lonely Hour was named best pop vocal album, and “Stay with Me” was awarded record of the year and song of the year. Smith was deemed best new artist.
The revelation in early 2015 that the singer had settled out of court with musician Tom Petty over melodic similarities between “Stay with Me” and Petty’s 1989 single “I Won’t Back Down” was tempered by a statement from the rocker expressing goodwill toward Smith and praising the quickness with which the situation was corrected. Also in 2015 Smith sang “Writing’s on the Wall,” which Smith wrote with Jimmy Napes, for the James Bond film Spectre; the duo later won an Academy Award for best original song. During the acceptance speech, Smith misquoted an interview with actor Ian McKellen, incorrectly implying that Smith was the first openly gay man to win an Oscar. The singer expressed regret for the gaffe afterward and took a brief break from the spotlight. Smith’s second studio album, The Thrill of It All, was released in late 2017 and won both popular and critical praise. The song “Him,” a plea for acceptance of Smith’s love for a man, was especially acclaimed. In 2019 Smith announced a nonbinary identity and tweeted that “my pronouns are they/them.”
