For many lovers of rock and roll, the station of choice was neither a local outlet nor a national network. It was something in between—WLAC, based in Nashville, Tennessee, which blasted 50,000 watts of varied programming, including plenty of rhythm and blues at night. In response to the contention that African Americans in rural areas of the South were still unserved by radio, the Federal Communications Commission granted WLAC permission to have one of the strongest signals in the country, provided that the station broadcast rhythm and blues.
Three white disc jockeys—John Richbourg, Gene Nobles, and Bill (“Hoss”) Allen—brought fame to themselves and WLAC by playing rhythm and blues, at least partly in response to the requests of returning World War II veterans who had been exposed to the new music in other parts of the country. Nobles, who joined WLAC in 1943, was the host of The Midnight Special—just one of three programs he hosted on the station.  Randy Wood, owner of Randy’s Record Shop in Gallatin, Tennessee, parlayed sponsorship of Nobles’s show into a successful mail-order business that made it possible for him to establish the Dot record label. A native of Arkansas and a former carnival barker, Nobles pushed the limits of deejay decorum, assaulting his listeners with insults and double entendres. Nobles retired in 1972 and died in 1989.
Hoss Allen, who began at WLAC as a utility deejay, is known for giving James Brown’s “Please, Please, Please” its first airplay in 1956, spinning it, in fact, before it was an official release. The station had received a rough version of the song, and Allen, filling in one day for Nobles, tried it out and kept it on the air for two weeks. Nobles and Richbourg also played the record constantly, and the three shared credit for Brown’s first chart success.
Richbourg, better known as John R., was loud and clear—mainly because he broadcast late at night, when there were fewer signals competing with that of WLAC, and because he worked hard at selling his music. Off the air, he also acted as a music promoter and manager. It was on the air, however, that he made his mark, as he invariably opened his show, “Yeah! It’s the big John R., the blues man. Whoa! Have mercy, honey, have mercy, have mercy. John R., ’way down south in the middle of Dixie. I’m gonna spread a little joy. You stand still now and take it like a man, you hear me?” He left radio in 1973 and died in 1986.
