Ōmura Masujirō,  (born 1824, Japan—died  December 1869, Ōsaka), Japanese scholar and soldier popularly regarded in Japan as the founder of the modern Japanese Army.
Ōmura was the son of a physician of the Chōshū clan in Sūo Province (now Yamaguchi Prefecture). After studying Confucian ethics, at 19 he began studying Rangaku (Dutch, or Western, learning). When he was 23, he went to Ōsaka to study Western medicine.
In 1850 he returned home to practice medicine but had little success, and in 1853 he became an instructor in Western learning for the Uwajima clan of Iyo (now Ehime Prefecture). He spent some time in Nagasaki studying Western naval science before going to Edo (now Tokyo) in 1856. There he became an instructor at Bansho-Shirabesho, the government’s office for the study of Western books, and later at the national military academy. During this period he studied English under James Curtis Hepburn, an American missionary, who later devised a romanized system for the Japanese language and who was then working for the Japanese government. Ōmura also studied Western military strategy.
After returning to his han (fief) in 1861, Ōmura applied his knowledge of the Western military sciences as an adviser to the Chōshū military organization. He gained fame as a strategist during the battles between the Chōshū and the forces of the shogunate in 1864 and 1865, before the Meiji Restoration (1868) reestablished direct Imperial rule.
In 1869 he was appointed minister of military affairs and planned the adoption of a conscription system for the new Imperial Army and the complete elimination of the samurai as a warrior class. While in Kyōto inspecting sites for military schools, he was assassinated by samurai opposed to his reforms. Ōmura was posthumously accorded the Junior Grade of Second Court Rank. A statue in front of the Yasukuni Shrine—dedicated to the spirits of all Japanese soldiers—in Tokyo depicts him as the “father” of the Imperial Army that evolved in the Meiji period.
