Zapatista National Liberation Army (EZLN), Spanish Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional,  guerrilla group in Mexico, founded in the late 20th century and named for the early 20th-century peasant revolutionary Emiliano Zapata. On Jan. 1, 1994, the Zapatistas staged a rebellion from their base in Chiapas, the southernmost Mexican state, to protest economic policies that they believed would negatively affect Mexico’s indigenous population. The insurgency later developed into a forceful political movement that advocated for Mexico’s disenfranchised Indians.
The early history of the Zapatista movement is obscure. Although members claimed that the group had been founded as early as 1983, it did not begin to attract followers until the early 1990s. In 1993, from its base in the Lancadón rainforest of eastern Chiapas state, the group called for Mexico’s Indians to rise up against the one-party rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional; PRI). The primary goal of the Zapatistas was land reform and redistribution. They also demanded greater political and cultural autonomy for the indigenous people of Chiapas and the rest of Mexico. The main impetus for the Zapatista rebellion was a series of economic reforms introduced by the Mexican government that were intended to prepare Mexico for integration into the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a free-trade pact linking Mexico, the United States, and Canada. In particular, a land reform bill introduced in 1993 sought to privatize the country’s ejidos, or communal farms. The Zapatistas argued that NAFTA and land reform would lead to further impoverishment of the Indians.
On Jan. 1, 1994—the day NAFTA went into effect—the Zapatistas seized four Chiapas towns. The leader of the movement, Subcomandante Marcos (Subcommander Marcos; identified as Rafael Guillén Vicente), urged Indians throughout Mexico to join the rebellion. Rebels held the towns for several days, battling with Mexican troops before withdrawing into the surrounding jungle. More than 100 people were killed in the initial battles. The uprising spread quickly to other parts of Chiapas, and in the ensuing years insurrections broke out in the nearby states of Guerrero, Veracruz, Puebla, and Oaxaca. During that time many indigenous communities voiced their support for the EZLN, and dozens of pro-Zapatista municipalities declared themselves autonomous from the state and federal governments.
Pres. Carlos Salinas de Gortari had initiated peace talks in early 1994, but the conflict with the EZLN remained unresolved by the time Ernesto Zedillo assumed the presidency later that year. In February 1995 President Zedillo launched a brief military offensive against the EZLN, issuing an arrest warrant for Marcos and other key figures. The unpopularity of those actions led Zedillo to reverse the policy and resume negotiations with the EZLN. Talks continued into February 1996, when both parties signed what became known as the San Andrés Accords, which outlined a program of land reform, indigenous autonomy, and cultural rights. In December of that year, however, Zedillo rejected the accords.
Meanwhile, the government simultaneously waged a covert war against the rebels. It armed paramilitary units that battled the Zapatistas and their supporters, frequently attacking civilians as retribution for their support of the rebels. One of the most horrific of those attacks occurred in December 1997, when paramilitary forces that supported the PRI massacred some 45 people—mostly women and children—in the pro-Zapatista Chiapas town of Acteal.
Despite periodic skirmishes, the Zapatistas eventually shifted away from armed combat toward peaceful political action. On the local level, Zapatistas formed administrative structures within the villages they controlled; eventually they also created several local seats of government called caracoles (“snail shells”), each of which represented a number of Zapatista-held municipalities. On the national level, in 1999 the group organized the National Consultation on Indigenous Rights and Culture, whereby several thousand Zapatista representatives traveled throughout Mexico and held political discussions. On March 21 of that year the program culminated in an EZLN-organized national poll on Indian rights. The roughly three million Mexicans who participated in the voting overwhelmingly supported the implementation of the San Andrés Accords.
When Vicente Fox, the first non-PRI candidate to be elected president in more than 70 years, took office in 2000, the Zapatistas called for his administration to meet their conditions, which included implementing the accords, in order to resume talks. In 2001 the federal legislature approved a revised version of the accords, but the EZLN denounced it. In 2003 the Zapatistas declared that they were unilaterally implementing the original accords in their territory.
Meanwhile, the EZLN continued to stage high-profile demonstrations and political programs. In 2001 Marcos led the Zapatistas on a 15-day march from Chiapas to Mexico City, a feat which became known as the “Zapatour.” On Jan. 1, 2003, some 20,000 Zapatistas marched to San Cristóbal de Las Casas, the first town that the EZLN had captured in 1994. In 2006 Marcos, who had changed his name to Delegate Zero, escorted the Zapatistas on a six-month countrywide tour known as “The Other Campaign,” which coincided with the 2006 Mexican presidential race. By that time, violent confrontations between the Mexican military and the EZLN had abated, but tensions between Zapatista communities and the state and federal authorities continued to exist.
