Alfredo Jaar,  (born Feb. 5, 1956, Santiago, Chile), Chilean-born conceptual artist whose work probes the relationship between the First World and the Third World.
Jaar lived on the island of Martinique between the ages of 6 and 16. When at 16 he returned to Santiago with his family, he took up the study of filmmaking at the Chilean–North American Institute of Culture and of architecture at the University of Chile. After receiving a degree in architecture, he moved to New York City in 1982.
Jaar’s experiences in these different regions of the world inform his art. His work consists primarily of installations in museums, galleries, and public spaces. It often questions the notion of geography and suggests that geographic boundaries are arbitrary divisions that serve to reinforce systems of power and exploitation. One of his better-known works is This Is Not America (A Logo for America) (1987), a sequence of projections on a light board overlooking a U.S. Army recruitment station in Times Square. The projections included an outlined map of the United States with the words This Is Not America written across it, the same words written across an image of the U.S. flag, and finally the word America across a map of all the Americas—North, Central, and South.
Jaar’s concerns with geography, power, and exploitation extend beyond the Americas. Geography=War (1990) utilized proportionately accurate maps of the world (in which North America is much smaller than on traditional maps) to force viewers to confront their assumptions about geography and power. These maps illustrated the journey taken by toxic waste sent to Koko, Nigeria, by industrialized countries. Jaar had visited Koko and displayed his photographs of the people and dump sites throughout the exhibition.
Jaar frequently incorporated mirrors into his installations in ways that located the viewer within the space of his photographs. In this way he encouraged the viewer to become engaged with the issue he presented. Some of his projects included ornate but empty frames placed on the ground in front of his images, provoking questions about art and reality.
In (Un)Framed (1987–91), Jaar examined the experiences of gold miners in Serra Pelada, Braz., and, with Untitled (Water) (1990), those of Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong. Between 1994 and 1998 he documented the genocide in Rwanda. This led to the photo and essay collection Let There Be Light, which highlighted the West’s ignorance of and indifference to the crisis. In 2000 Jaar was named a MacArthur Foundation fellow.
