André-Adolphe-Eugène Disdéri,  (born March 28, 1819, Paris, France—died Oct. 4, 1889, Paris), French photographer noted for his popularization of the carte-de-visite, a small albumen print mounted on a 21/2 × 4 inch (6 × 10.2 cm) card and used as a calling card.
Although Disdéri sought a career in the arts, the death of his father obligated him to turn to the business world to support first his mother and siblings and then his own wife, Geneviève Elizabeth Francart, and his children. He left Paris for the city of Brest, in western France, during the Revolution of 1848. There, with his wife, he opened a photographic studio and made daguerreotypes. Leaving his wife to manage the Brest studio, he moved to Nîmes and began to use the recently developed wet collodion process for a variety of subjects in addition to portraits. These included picturesque groups of beggars and ragpickers and less artistic shots of athletes and labourers.
By 1854 Disdéri was back in Paris as owner of the largest photography studio in the city. That year, he patented the small-format carte-de-visite, which filled a need for portraits that could be captured rapidly and inexpensively. As the name implies, it was derived from the calling cards used by the middle and upper classes in paying social calls. The suggestion that such cards might bear the caller’s image prompted Disdéri to invent a method of using a single camera with four lenses and a divided septum to produce multiple portraits on a single plate. When printed, the images, which allowed for variations in pose, could be cut apart and pasted on small cardboard mounts. Although this production method made portraiture affordable for the lower middle-class, the fact that royalty and celebrities sat for such portraits made them instantly collectible. Disdéri gained a considerable fortune from this popularity, while the effect of the portraits on French Second Empire society also was notable. By 1868, interest in the cartes had faded, and he moved on to other portrait formats, none of which brought him further financial success.
