Bruce Nauman,  (born December 6, 1941, Fort Wayne, Indiana, U.S.), American artist whose work in a broad range of mediums made him a major figure in conceptual art.
Nauman was educated at the University of Wisconsin, Madison (B.A., 1964), and the University of California, Davis (M.F.A., 1966), and became part of the burgeoning California art scene in the late 1960s. His Self Portrait as a Fountain (1966; original photograph destroyed, reissued 1970) showed the artist spouting a stream of water from his mouth. Witty and irreverent, Nauman tested the idea of art as a stable vehicle of communication and the role of the artist as revelatory communicator. The True Artist Helps the World by Revealing Mystic Truths (1967) sets those words in a spiral made of neon, revealing the wistful and subtle irony often encountered in his work, as the text’s optimism and sense of cultural continuity is undermined by the implications of the florid neon. Nauman’s videos often featured the artist in his studio performing various mundane tasks, such as Bouncing Two Balls Between the Floor and Ceiling with Changing Rhythms (1967–68) and Walk with Contrapposto (1968). In the latter he strutted within a narrow corridor he had constructed, exaggerating the contrapposto pose of Classical sculptures. Soon after, he repurposed the hallway into a series of installations that invited observers to experience the space for themselves. Some of the passageways included mirrors, cameras, or coloured fluorescent light (as in Green Light Corridor [1970]).
Nauman’s interests led him to widely diverse materials; beyond photography, performance art, and neon tubing, he also regularly produced drawings, videos, films, prints, installations, and sculptures in a range of mediums. The use of neon with words continued to intrigue him, and large wall installations such as One Hundred Live and Die (1984) impassively play out both the inevitability and the vacancy of language. Nauman also developed an interest in using casts of taxidermy forms to create variously stacked assemblages or mobiles of wild deer, foxes, caribou, and other animals, sometimes dismembered and reassembled, evoking an uneasy intersection of civilization and the wild. Works of this theme include Carousel (Stainless Steel Version) (1988), Untitled (Three Large Animals) (1989), and Leaping Foxes (2018).
While Nauman’s early videos often featured the artist as the actor, beginning in the late 1980s, he stayed behind the camera. In Clown Torture (1987) he filmed an actor in a clown costume in unsettling circumstances, while in Shadow Puppets and Instructed Mime (1990) he featured a voice giving demeaning instructions to a mime. In 2000 Nauman set a camera on the nocturnal creatures that crept into his studio when he was absent (Mapping the Studio 1 [Fat Chance John Cage] [2001]). He returned to videos of himself later in his career, revisiting Walk with Contrapposto as an older man in Contrapposto Studies, i through vii (2015–16). Nauman also explored the possibilities and limitations of new media and the human body while documenting his studio using a 3-D video camera in Nature Morte (2020).
Nauman’s work was shown frequently at the Whitney Biennial, in numerous solo shows, and in several retrospectives, including those organized by the Walker Art Center (1993), Minneapolis, Minnesota; the Museum of Modern Art (2018), New York; and Tate Modern (2020), London. He was also commissioned by Tate Modern to create a work for the museum’s Turbine Hall (Raw Materials [2004]). Nauman was awarded a Golden Lion at the 48th Venice Biennale (1999) and became a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 2000. In 2004 he received a Praemium Imperiale award, presented by the Japan Art Association to “artists who have contributed significantly to the development of international arts and culture.” “Bruce Nauman: Topological Gardens,” featuring works from throughout his career, was awarded a Golden Lion at the 2009 Venice Biennale.
