Carleton E. Watkins, in full Carleton Emmons Watkins or Carleton Eugene Watkins,  (born Nov. 11, 1829, Oneonta, N.Y., U.S.—died June 23, 1916, Imola, Calif.), American photographer best known for his artistic documentation of the landscape of the American West. He also produced images of industrial sites in that region. (For further information regarding his name, see the Researcher’s Note.)
In 1851, at age 22, Watkins left his birthplace in rural upstate New York for California, traveling with Collis P. Huntington, who became famous later as a financier and railroad magnate. Two years later, Watkins found work in Robert H. Vance’s photographic portrait gallery in San Jose, where he became proficient in making daguerreotypes. After the introduction of the wet collodion process—which reduced exposure time, created a sharper image, and was considerably cheaper—California photographers, Watkins among them, recognized its value for capturing the spectacular landscape of the region.
By the early 1860s, Watkins’s reputation as a field photographer was firmly established. His images were large and clear, and he seemed able almost always to select the spot which, in his words, “would give the best view.” His association with members of the California intellectual and artistic elite, among them John C. and Jesse Frémont, Thomas Starr King, William Keith, and Josiah Dwight Whitney helped transform him from a competent craftsman into a photographer of great artistry. His first significant landscape project involved making large-format (21 × 18 inch [roughly 53 × 46 cm]) images of Yosemite Valley. These photographs were influential in President Lincoln’s decision to name Yosemite a national preserve and ultimately in persuading the United States Congress to pass legislation preserving the valley from commercial development. Because of these photographs Mount Watkins in Yosemite was named in his honour (1865). Many of them were used to illustrate Whitney’s The Yosemite Book (1868).
Besides photographing landscapes in and around San Francisco from 1867 through the 1880s, Watkins traveled extensively. He photographed the Columbia River region and Mount Shasta in the Pacific Northwest, parts of southern California and Arizona, Nevada’s Comstock mines, and Yellowstone National Park. His work was exhibited extensively and won medals in expositions throughout the United States and Europe. Following the loss of his entire studio in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire, Watkins became ill and destitute, and in 1910 he was committed to a hospital for the insane.
