Charles Nègre,  (born May 9, 1820, Grasse, France—died January 16, 1880, Grasse), French painter and photographer best known for his photographs of Paris street scenes and architectural monuments, notably the Notre-Dame and Chartres cathedrals.
Nègre first went to Paris in 1839 to study painting in the studio of Paul Delaroche. His fellow students there included Roger Fenton, Gustave Le Gray, and Henri Le Secq. After studying with Delaroche, Nègre apprenticed briefly with Michel-Martin Drolling and then with Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, with whom he stayed for a few years beginning about 1843. Nègre was a talented and respected painter and regularly participated in the Paris Salon des Beaux-Arts exhibitions in the 1840s and ’50s. Having been encouraged by Delaroche to experiment with photography, Nègre began working with daguerreotypes (the first successful form of photography, made on a copper plate), photographing landscapes as early as 1844. By the late 1840s he had begun to make calotypes, which, in contrast to daguerreotypes, were made from lightweight paper negatives, had a shorter exposure time, and could be endlessly reproduced, whereas the daguerreotype could produce only one image. His early photographs were made to be used as aids to his painting, and he often retouched them with pencil or ink to achieve a desired effect. 
In 1851 Nègre became one of the founding members of the Société Héliographique, the first photographic society, whose members included photographers, scientists, and intellectuals. His early photographs taken outside the studio were street scenes that attempted to capture movement among   street vendors, musicians, chimney sweeps, and the like. He invented a system of multiple lenses that would allow him to capture motion, which he succeeded in doing in photographs such as Market Scene at the Port de L’Hotel de Ville, Paris (1851) and Chimney Sweeps Walking (1851). When Nègre was not chosen by the government in 1851 to go on a Mission Héliographique—a survey of the country’s architecture to help determine preservation and restoration needs—he embarked on his own photographic expedition to the south of France, where in 1852 he documented the Midi region. He compiled his many calotypes from that trip into a book, Le Midi de la France: sites et monuments historiques photographié (1854–55).  In 1853 Nègre took a photograph commonly known as Le Stryge (“The Vampire”). The image, which has since become an icon of 19th-century photography, captured his friend Le Secq posing next to a massive gargoyle high above Paris, atop Notre-Dame Cathedral.
Nègre was deeply engaged in the technical aspects of the craft of photography and became known as a premier maker of heliogravures, reproductions of drawings or other graphic material with a photomechanical process invented by Nicéphore Niépce in 1822. He used the process to create plates for a monograph of his series of photographs of Chartres Cathedral under renovation. The book won the highest honours at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1855. In 1856 Nègre patented his own heliogravure process that improved upon the one by Niépce by making the images less prone to fade and less expensive to produce. Nègre entered his invention in a competition for best photomechanical reproduction method sponsored by Honoré T.P. Joseph d’Albert, duc de Luynes, in 1856. Though Nègre did not win the competition (awarded in 1859), the duke was impressed with Nègre’s work and commissioned him to use his improved heliogravure technique to create the plates for a book documenting the duke’s 1864 travels—Voyage d’exploration à la mer Morte, à Petra, et sur la rive gauche du Jourdain, 3 vol. (1868–74; “Expedition to the Dead Sea, Petra, and the Left Bank of the Jordan River”). The high quality of Nègre’s work was also recognized by Emperor Napoleon III, who in 1858–59 commissioned the photographer to document the Imperial Asylum in Vincennes, a newly opened charitable institution for disabled workers. Nègre’s photographs, striking in their dramatic light-and-dark effects, documented the institution’s edifice as well as the daily routines of its residents.
Throughout the 1850s and ’60s, Nègre exhibited his photographs widely, not only in Paris but also in Amsterdam, Brussels, and London. He spent the last 15 years or so of his life in the south of France, in Midi, teaching high-school drawing and running a commercial studio in Nice. His artistic work resurfaced in exhibitions in the 1960s and ’70s, and he has since been recognized as an early master of photography.
