Dorothea Lange,  (born May 26, 1895, Hoboken, New Jersey, U.S.—died October 11, 1965, San Francisco, California), American documentary photographer whose portraits of displaced farmers during the Great Depression greatly influenced later documentary and journalistic photography.
Lange studied photography at Columbia University in New York City under Clarence H. White, a member of the Photo-Secession group. In 1918 she decided to travel around the world, earning money as she went by selling her photographs. Her money ran out by the time she got to San Francisco, so she settled there and obtained a job in a photography studio.
During the Great Depression, Lange began to photograph the unemployed men who wandered the streets of San Francisco. Pictures such as White Angel Breadline (1932), showing the desperate condition of these men, were publicly exhibited and received immediate recognition both from the public and from other photographers, especially members of Group f.64. These photographs also led to a commission in 1935 from the federal Resettlement Administration (later called the Farm Security Administration [FSA]). The latter agency, established by the U.S. Agriculture Department, hoped that Lange’s powerful images would bring the conditions of the rural poor to the public’s attention. Her photographs of migrant workers, with whom she lived for some time, were often presented with captions featuring the words of the workers themselves. FSA director Roy Stryker considered her most famous portrait, Migrant Mother, Nipomo, California (1936), to be the iconic representation of the agency’s agenda. The work now hangs in the Library of Congress.
Lange’s first exhibition was held in 1934, and thereafter her reputation as a skilled documentary photographer was firmly established. In 1939 she published a collection of her photographs in the book An American Exodus: A Record of Human Erosion. Her second husband, economist Paul Taylor, provided the text. (Lange’s first husband was painter Maynard Dixon.) She then received a Guggenheim fellowship in 1941, and the following year she recorded the mass evacuation of Japanese Americans to detention camps after Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor. That work was celebrated in 2006 with the publication of Impounded: Dorothea Lange and the Censored Images of Japanese American Internment, edited by historians Linda Gordon and Gary Y. Okihiro. After World War II, Lange created a number of photo-essays, including Mormon Villages and The Irish Countryman, for Life magazine.
In 1953–54 Lange worked with Edward Steichen on “The Family of Man,” an exhibition organized by the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York in 1955. Steichen included several of her photographs in the show. Over the next 10 years she traveled the world, photographically documenting countries throughout Asia, notably South Asia, the Middle East, and South America. Finally, in the year leading up to her death in 1965, Lange spent much of her time working on an exhibition of her work to be held at MoMA the following year. She died of cancer shortly before the retrospective opened.
