Eliot Porter, in full Eliot Furness Porter,  (born December 6, 1901, Winnetka, Illinois, U.S.—died  November 2, 1990, Santa Fe, New Mexico), American photographer noted for his detailed and exquisite colour images of birds and landscapes.
Porter, the brother of painter Fairfield Porter, trained as an engineer at Harvard College (B.S., 1924) and as a physician at Harvard Medical School (M.D., 1929). He taught biochemistry at Harvard from 1929 to 1939, when he turned his hobby of photographing birds into a career. Photographer Alfred Stieglitz praised his work and gave him a show at his An American Place gallery in 1939. Porter’s early photographs of birds were in black and white, but in the early 1940s he began using the then-new Kodachrome colour film, whose slow speed required the use of large flashbulbs in order to achieve correct exposures. Porter worked with a cumbersome large-format camera, valuing the greater detail this equipment allowed. Lacking mobility because of the size of his camera and its reliance on large flashbulbs, Porter often had to spend hours and even days waiting for specific birds to perch near him. His bird photographs, much like the paintings and drawings of John James Audubon, are ornithologically important because of their meticulous detail while also artistically of note because of their fine technique and composition. His work was in the style of Ansel Adams’s “straight” photography, showing the subject in a straightforward manner, with an emphasis on tone and detail.
Gradually Porter’s colour photography shifted from the portrayal of birds to natural landscapes, which he first presented in 1962 in an exhibition entitled “In Wildness Is the Preservation of the World,” with an accompanying catalog. Porter was active in the cause of environmental preservation and had this and other books published by the Sierra Club. He published many other collections of nature photographs, including those in The Place No One Knew (1963), Baja California (1967), Galapagos (1968), Appalachian Wilderness (1970), and The Tree Where Man Was Born (1972). Many of his finest photographs of birds were collected in Birds of North America (1972).
