Eliza Ruhamah Scidmore,  (born October 14, 1856, Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.—died November 3, 1928, Geneva, Switzerland), American travel writer and photographer whose books and magazine articles often featured her perspective on travel and culture in Asia. She is perhaps best known as the person responsible for the planting of Japanese cherry trees in Washington, D.C.
Scidmore attended Oberlin (Ohio) College in 1873–74 and then moved to Washington, D.C., where she contributed letters on political society to newspapers in New York City and in St. Louis, Missouri. A short time later she journeyed to Alaska and published a collection of her magazine articles on that distant territory as Alaska, Its Southern Coast and the Sitkan Archipelago (1885).
Her appetite for travel whetted, Scidmore spent long periods in Asia, particularly in Japan. Her articles on travel, manners, and politics appeared in such magazines as Outlook, Century, Harper’s Weekly, and World Today. She was a member of the National Geographic Society from 1890, serving at various times as corresponding secretary, associate editor, foreign secretary, and member of the board of managers of the society. Her articles for National Geographic magazine were generally illustrated with her own photographs. She wrote numerous books, including Jinrikisha Days in Japan (1891), Java, the Garden of the East (1897), China, the Long-Lived Empire (1900), Winter India (1903), and As the Hague Ordains (1907). Scidmore wrote her texts on Asia in a highly personal manner that reflected the perspective of a Western tourist—a perspective that, in keeping with her time, applauded British colonialism and viewed non-Westerners in a sometimes condescending manner.
After returning from a trip to Japan in 1885, Scidmore petitioned the United States government to bring cherry trees to the capital from Japan. Not until 1910, with the cooperation of first lady Helen Taft, did the trees come to Washington, D.C., as a symbol of national friendship with Japan. Upon Scidmore’s death, the Japanese government requested that her ashes be interred in Yokohama.
