Enlarger, also called projection printer,  in photography, device for producing a photographic print or negative larger than the original negative or transparency. The modern enlarger consists of a projection assembly attached to a vertical column that is mounted on a horizontal base. The projection assembly includes an enclosed illumination system, a holder for positioning and flattening the film, a lens for projecting the image onto the base (which holds the photosensitive printing paper), and a mechanism for focusing the image onto the paper. The entire assembly can be raised or lowered in a track on the column to adjust the size of the print, and many of the operating components can be controlled automatically.
The illumination system is made up of the light source, usually an incandescent lightbulb but sometimes another type of bulb such as fluorescent or halogen, plus an optical system for directing the light efficiently to the film. One type of optical system is the condenser, a system of lenses that focus the beam of light through the film and toward the enlarging lens. Another type is the diffuser, which scatters the light from the bulb so that it falls evenly across the film. Light sources and optical systems are chosen depending on the type of film being used and the characteristics desired on the enlarged print. Condensers are used for prints with fine detail and high contrast, whereas diffusers are used to minimize blemishes. A filter drawer between the light source and the film permits the insertion of colour filters or variable contrast filters.
Traditional film-based photographic enlarging has declined considerably with the switch to digital photography, its place being taken by printers such as the ink-jet. However, there is still a use for film-based enlargers in some commercial and art photography where the qualities of photosensitive paper are desired. In addition, some digital enlargers can work from a digital image file instead of a film negative. Some read the file and then re-create the image on a liquid-crystal display (LCD) panel that is inserted into the projection assembly in the place of the film negative. In others, a laser spot can scan directly across a photosensitive material without using an LCD.
