Erich Salomon,  (born April 28, 1886, Berlin, Germany—died July 7, 1944, Auschwitz concentration camp), pioneering German photojournalist who is best known for his candid photographs of statesmen and celebrities.
Salomon’s early interests included carpentry and zoology. He received a doctorate in law from the University of Munich, but he practiced law only briefly. His career as a freelance photographer began in 1928, when he bought an Ermanox, one of the first miniature cameras equipped with a high-speed lens, which enabled him to photograph in dim light. He concealed this camera in an attaché case and secretly took photographs of a sensational murder trial. These sold so well to news periodicals that he became a professional photojournalist. He began to specialize in photographing international conferences and social gatherings of heads of state, with the intention of showing the human qualities of world leaders who were usually only captured in stiff, formal portraits. Working inconspicuously, he especially enjoyed catching the leaders’ unguarded moments of fatigue, delight, or disgust. His uncanny ability to capture private moments prompted Aristide Briand, 11-time premier of France, to call him “the king of indiscretion.” Salomon’s presence at state functions eventually became customary, however, and Briand later stated that nobody would believe a meeting was important unless Salomon photographed it. Salomon’s informal, spontaneous style had a lasting influence on the way photojournalists captured famous figures.
Salomon visited England in 1929 and the United States in 1930, photographing prominent persons of both countries. In 1931 he published Berühmte Zeitgenossen in unbewachten Augenblicken (“Celebrated Contemporaries in Unguarded Moments”), a collection of his photographs of more than 170 celebrities.
Because he was Jewish, Salomon went into hiding in the Netherlands during World War II, but he was finally betrayed by a Dutch Nazi. In May 1944 he was sent to the concentration camp at Auschwitz, where he died.
