Fotoform,  group of photographers in Germany after World War II who refined and expounded upon the photographic techniques developed at the Bauhaus, the most advanced school of design in Germany between World Wars I and II, as well as those espoused by the Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) movement. Headed by Otto Steinert (a former physician and the only member without professional photographic training), the group included Peter Keetman, Siegfried Lauterwasser, Wolfgang Reisewitz, Toni Schneiders, and Ludwig Windstosser.
The first Fotoform exhibit, held in 1950 in Cologne, Ger., at the Photokina fair (then Photo-Kino), emphasized abstract form derived from patterns found in nature and from darkroom manipulation. The Nazi regime, having exercised rigid control over Germany’s cultural institutions, had forced any art deviating from an explicitly nationalist agenda underground for the duration of the war. In the wake of the regime’s collapse five years prior, the Fotoform exhibition caused a sensation (abstraction in any of the arts having been among the styles deemed by the Nazis as degenerate and insufficiently German). Fotoform represented the first attempt to rearticulate and elaborate upon the aborted photographic precepts of the Bauhaus (which had been shuttered by the Nazis in 1933) and Neue Sachlichkeit.
Steinert felt that the format of the first show was too limited. At the group’s remaining three exhibitions (1951, 1954, 1958), which he titled “Subjective Fotographie,” he accepted any style of photograph—from the nonobjective photogram to literal reportage—that was aesthetically satisfying and bore the imprint of profound individual creativity. Nevertheless, most contributors continued to submit nonobjective photographs. Feeling that the once-revolutionary style of the group had become a rigid formula, Steinert abandoned Fotoform after the 1958 exhibition, and without his organization of the exhibitions, the group ceased to exist. Fotoform’s revolutionary rejection of the constraints of both composition and medium, however, catalyzed a thorough reevaluation of the possibilities of photography.
