James Nachtwey,  (born March 14, 1948, Syracuse, New York, U.S.), American photojournalist noted for his unflinching and moving images of wars, conflicts, and social upheaval.
Nachtwey graduated from Dartmouth College, where he studied art history and political science, and then served in the merchant marine. Influenced by the work of still photographers during the Vietnam War and impressed by the power of photos to communicate the immediacy of events, he became a self-taught student of photography. From 1976 to 1980 he was a newspaper photographer in New Mexico, and in 1980 he moved to New York City to work as a freelance photographer. There he joined Black Star agency. After his first foreign assignment, in Northern Ireland, he worked in Central America, the Middle East, Africa, and Eastern Europe. The images he recorded in those places appeared in a number of international publications, including National Geographic, Life, Time, El País, and L’Express. In 1984 he became a contract photographer with Time magazine. He was a member of Magnum photography cooperative from 1986 to 2001, when he became one of the founding members of VII Photo Agency, named for the number of its founding members. He left that agency in 2011.
Nachtwey received many of the most-respected photography awards, many of them multiple times, notably the Robert Capa Gold Medal, Magazine Photographer of the Year, and World Press Photo of the Year. Compared to Robert Capa for his sense of compassion and commitment and to Henri Cartier-Bresson, who inspired him, for his composition, Nachtwey said of his own work:
This compassion—which was particularly compelling in view of the death, destruction, and inhumanity he witnessed for more than three decades—enabled him both to be present at and to record the heart-wrenching moments in personal lives throughout the world.
Nachtwey’s books included Deeds of War (1989) and Inferno (1999). War Photographer (2001) is a documentary film about Nachtwey and his work.
