John Szarkowski, in full Thaddeus John Szarkowski,  (born December 18, 1925, Ashland, Wisconsin, U.S.—died July 7, 2007, Pittsfield, Massachusetts), American photographer and curator who served as the visionary director of photography at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City from 1962 through 1991 and demonstrated that photography is an art form rather than just a means to document events.
Szarkowski graduated with a degree in art history (1948) from the University of Wisconsin—Madison. He took his first job at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, where he worked as a museum photographer. He exhibited his own photographs there in 1949. He moved to Buffalo, New York, in 1951 to teach photography at the Albright Art School, and from there to Chicago, where, with the help of a Guggenheim fellowship, he worked on his book The Idea of Louis Sullivan (1956). In 1962 he became director of MoMA’s photography department.
During his tenure at MoMA, Szarkowski curated 160 thought-provoking exhibitions and helped launch the careers of prominent photographers Diane Arbus, William Eggleston, Lee Friedlander, and Garry Winogrand and expand the reputations of Walker Evans and Robert Frank, among others. Many of his exhibitions presented groundbreaking theories on photography, its capacity as a visual medium, and its place in the museum and the larger art world. “New Documents,” the 1967 MoMA exhibition that featured little-known photographers Arbus, Friedlander, and Winogrand, introduced a personal form of documentary photography. Those artists—whose careers were largely established by “New Documents”—took striking photographs of what they found interesting in their everyday lives. That approach differed from the photojournalistic images taken by their predecessors, many of whom had clearly defined social objectives. With that exhibition Szarkowski made the controversial but ultimately convincing claim that vernacular photographs had a place in a museum. 
A gifted photographer in his own right, Szarkowski was renowned for his landscapes, especially the ones he photographed in the 1960s in the Quetico-Superior wilderness between Minnesota and Ontario. His work was featured in his 1956 book on Louis Sullivan as well as in The Face of Minnesota (1958). He was also the author of The Photographer’s Eye (1966), Looking at Photographs: 100 Pictures from the Collection of the Museum of Modern Art (1973), William Eggleston’s Guide (1976), the four-volume The Work of Atget (1981–85; with Maria Morris Hambourg), and Photography Until Now (1989). After retiring from MoMA, Szarkowski resumed his position behind the lens; in 2005 a retrospective of his work premiered at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
Szarkowski wrote articles for Encyclopædia Britannica on Ansel Adams, Eugène Atget, Walker Evans, Edward Steichen, Alfred Stieglitz, and Edward Weston.
