Leopold Godowsky, Jr.,  (born May 27, 1900, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.—died February 18, 1983, New York, New York), American musician and photographic technician primarily known as a codeveloper of Kodachrome film (1935).
Son of the pianist Leopold Godowsky, the young Godowsky attended New York City’s Riverdale School, where he met his future photographic partner, Leopold Mannes, who shared Godowsky’s interest in both music and photography. Working as a violinist, Godowsky was able to set up a small laboratory with Mannes and begin experiments in colour photography. In 1917 Godowsky entered the University of California as a physics and chemistry major, as well as accepting positions with the Los Angeles and San Francisco symphony orchestras. He continued to collaborate with Mannes, exchanging experimental findings and ideas by mail.
In 1919 Godowsky and Mannes created a mediocre colour film, at which time they realized that the additive process that they had been working with would not give them the true colours that they sought. It was at this point that Godowsky and Mannes switched to a multiple-layered subtractive-colour-film approach that would eventually lead them to the development of Kodachrome. They opened their first real laboratory in New York City in 1922, and, with the backing of C.E. Kenneth Mees of the Eastman Kodak Company in 1930, the two men moved to Rochester, New York, to work with assistants at the well-equipped Kodak Research Laboratories. On April 15, 1935, Kodachrome was announced as the earliest of the subtractive-colour films that proved to be a boon for colour photography. Though initially used for animated motion pictures, Kodachrome was later improved, and it remains a popular film today.
Godowsky went on to study mathematics at Columbia University and continued his photographic experiments in New York City and at Westport, Connecticut. He assisted in the development of Kodacolor and Ektachrome and received numerous awards for his contributions in the field of photography.
