Manuel Álvarez Bravo,  (born February 4, 1902, Mexico City, Mexico—died October 19, 2002, Mexico City), photographer who was most noted for his poetic images of Mexican people and places. He was part of the artistic renaissance that occurred after the Mexican Revolution (1910–20). Although he was influenced by international developments, notably Surrealism, his art remained profoundly Mexican.
Born into a family of artists and writers, Álvarez Bravo grew up in an “atmosphere in which art was breathed.” He left school at age 13 and took a job as an office boy and then as a clerk in government offices in order to help his family during financially difficult times. His interest in literature and the arts prompted him to study these subjects at night school. After meeting German photographer Hugo Brehme in 1923, he purchased his first camera. He was largely self-taught, and other photographers played a major role in his development
Through his friendship with Italian photographer Tina Modotti, Álvarez Bravo met the American photographer Edward Weston and many of the leading artists of the Mexican renaissance, including Diego Rivera, Frida Kahlo, Rufino Tamayo, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and José Clemente Orozco. He took over Modotti’s job as photographer for the magazine Mexican Folkways after her deportation. He had his first one-man show in 1932. That same year his interest in cinema was piqued when he worked as a cameraman on Sergey Eisenstein’s film Que viva Mexico! (never completed) and was furthered when he met Paul Strand just as the latter was completing the film Redes (1936). Like Strand’s film, Álvarez Bravo’s movie Tehuantepec (now lost) was based on a labour strike. But it was his still photography that made his reputation: he exhibited photographs regularly, and in 1935 he participated in a groundbreaking photo exhibition with the French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson and the American photographer Walker Evans at the avant-garde Julien Levy Gallery in New York City.
Álvarez Bravo’s work went through several distinct phases. In the late 1920s, influenced by Weston, he took close-up photographs that transformed the subject (typically architecture or nature) into an artistic abstraction. By the early 1930s, however, he had begun to concentrate on the urban landscape of Mexico City, capturing everyday street life. The cacti and expansive horizon of Mexico’s landscape later became frequent subjects, and, throughout his career, politics often informed his photographs, notably Striking Worker Assassinated (1934). In 1939 he was asked by André Breton, one of the founders of Surrealism, to provide a photograph for the cover of an exhibition catalog, and the resulting image, The Good Reputation Sleeping (1939), which depicted a bandaged nude lying amid cactus buds, was among Álvarez Bravo’s best-known works. Breton also published many of Álvarez Bravo’s photographs in the Surrealist review Minotaure.
Early in his career he was influenced by abstract and Cubist art from Europe, so his work displays a strong sense of formal design. His interest in Mexican religious rituals such as the Day of the Dead introduced an element of the fantastic into his work, which gives his images the kind of hidden symbolism that is common in Surrealism. As in Surrealist art, things are not what they seem but suggest mysterious meanings.  In 1997 he was the subject of a major retrospective show at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.
