Morimura Yasumasa,  (born 1951, Ōsaka, Japan), Japanese artist known for his large-scale self-portraits that were often superimposed on art-historical images or on pictures of iconic individuals.
After graduating (1978) from Kyōto City University of Arts, Morimura served as an assistant at the university and devoted himself to painting, drawing, photography, and wood-block art. He first attracted international attention in 1988, when a number of his self-portraits were included in the Venice Biennale’s Aperto exhibition for young artists. Solo exhibitions at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago (1992), and the Cartier Foundation for Contemporary Art, Paris (1993), earned him further acclaim. He was also one of 60 artists selected for inclusion in the influential traveling show “Japanese Art After 1945: Scream Against the Sky” (1994).
In the 1990s Morimura broadened his range of parody. Besides re-creating masterworks of Western art, he used computer technology to manipulate photographs of Western pop-culture icons, in some cases superimposing portions of his image over those of celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Madonna, and Michael Jackson. At a number of exhibitions, he took this technique to extremes by installing instant-photo booths alongside his self-portraits. The devices allowed spectators to superimpose an image of their face over Morimura’s. The artist explained his intentions by saying that he believed all people have a common desire for transformation.
Whereas some critics were puzzled by the self-portraits and wondered whether they amounted to art or were simply humorous imitations, others saw them as the work of a clever cultural commentator interested in reinterpreting and parodying Western subjects from an Asian point of view. Although critics debated the significance of Morimura’s art, they were unanimous in recognizing his contributions to a new global art movement based on the collapse of cultural boundaries and the free exchange of artistic influences.
In the late 1990s Morimura demonstrated his versatility by designing clothing for Japanese fashion designer Issey Miyake, and he gained attention as a lecturer, author, and singer-songwriter. In 1998 another major exhibition of his artwork, held at the Melbourne Festival in Australia, helped solidify his reputation as one of Japan’s most innovative contemporary artists. In the same year, a retrospective of his work was held at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Tokyo. “The Museum of Daydream and Disguise: Self-Portrait as Art History” highlighted the series of large-scale self-portraits for which Morimura was best known. Incorporating photography, painting, and computer digital imaging, the series showed the artist posed playfully in scenes that re-created famous masterpieces by Rembrandt, Édouard Manet, and Vincent van Gogh, among other renowned Western artists. In the 2001 exhibit “An Inner Dialogue with Frida Kahlo,” Morimura portrayed himself dressed as the famous Mexican Surrealist. His later exhibits included “My Life Through a Looking-Glass” and “Requiem for the XX Century: Twilight of the Turbulent Gods.”
