Nancy Holt,  (born April 5, 1938, Worcester, Massachusetts, U.S.—died February 8, 2014, New York, New York), American land artist known for her large site-specific works and her role in the development of Land Art in the 1960s. She also worked in film, video, and photography and created many works of public art. She is best known for her earthwork titled Sun Tunnels (1973–76), located in the Great Basin Desert in Utah.
Holt graduated from Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, in 1960 with a bachelor’s degree in biology. After college she moved to New York City, where she met and collaborated with other artists such as Carl Andre, Michael Heizer, Eva Hesse, Richard Serra, and Robert Smithson, the last of whom she married in 1963.  She began working with film and photography, exploring and revising the ways people viewed the world around them. Though she was raised on the East Coast, Holt created most of her art in the West and Southwest of the United States. She also created much, if not all, of her work outdoors. An early photography series from 1968, Western Graveyards, depicts old cemeteries in the deserts of Nevada and California, many of them fenced off and overgrown. Her 1975 film Pine Barrens shows desolate sand and pine landscapes of central New Jersey combined with local music and interviews with residents.
For Sun Tunnels, Holt arranged four giant concrete pipes on their sides in an open X shape so that they framed the rising and setting sun at the summer and winter solstices. Each tunnel was pierced with holes that created a replica of a constellation when light shone through them into the dark of the tunnel. She described this piece as bringing the vastness of the desert back to a human scale and allowing visitors to view their surroundings through the more-contained perspective offered by the tunnels.
She is also known for Dark Star Park (1979–84) in Rosslyn, Virginia. To create a work of urban reclamation, Holt transformed an area that was once a gas station and dilapidated warehouse into a municipal park with pools, stone spheres and pillars, and tunnels along with “shadow” impressions that she embedded in the ground. Each year at 9:32 am on August 1, the date in 1860 on which the land that became Rosslyn was purchased, the natural shadows of the sculptures align with the fabricated shadows. Another of Holt’s notable works is the Solar Rotary (1995) at the University of South Florida, Tampa, a public art installation of eight connected poles and benches arranged in a circular plaza. The influence of the sun’s movement also is present in that work: for one minute every year, the sun shines directly through the poles and casts a circle around the central circular bench, which is embedded with a piece of a 4.5-billion-year-old meteorite. The surrounding plaza has five plaques commemorating significant events in Florida’s history, and each plaque also gets its annual moment in the sun.  Other land works include Sky Mound (1988) in the Meadowlands in New Jersey and Up and Under (1998) in Nokia, Finland.
Holt worked with film and photography throughout her career as part of her earthworks as well as to document them. Her final film, however, stemmed from an unfinished work by Smithson. The Making of Amarillo Ramp (2013) included footage of Holt, Serra, and art dealer Tony Shafrazi in 1973 completing Amarillo Ramp, a project that Smithson left unfinished at his death in a plane crash that year.
Holt’s works have been exhibited in museums across the world, including the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the Louvre. Among her honours were fellowships from the National Endowment for the Arts in 1975, 1978, 1983, 1985, and 1988 and a Guggenheim fellowship in 1978. The first retrospective of her work, organized by the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery at Columbia University in 2010, traveled to other venues. In 2013 she was the recipient of a lifetime achievement award from the International Sculpture Center.
