Ruth Orkin,  (born September 3, 1921, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.—died January 16, 1985, New York, New York), American photographer and filmmaker who was known for her explorations of contemporary urban life. Her photograph American Girl in Italy (1951)—which captured a woman walking down a street in Italy and being ogled by group of men—became an iconic image of the street photography genre.
Orkin was raised in Hollywood and was the only child of silent-film actress Mary Ruby and Samuel Orkin, a toy manufacturer. Interested in film and photography from an early age, she received a camera when she was 10 years old. In 1939 she embarked on a bicycle trip that took her from California across the country to New York City to see the world’s fair being held there, and she photographed her journey. She returned to Los Angeles and, after working at MGM studios as a messenger girl and then serving a short stint in the Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps (later the Women’s Army Corps), moved to New York City permanently in 1943.
There Orkin found work as a photographer and joined the Photo League, whose members documented working-class and impoverished neighbourhoods throughout the city as a method of social reform. She met photographer and fellow Photo League member Morris Engel, and the two became collaborators and eventually married (1952). Beginning in 1945 Orkin had a flourishing freelance photojournalism career. She photographed world-renowned musicians and conductors at the Tanglewood Music Festival (Lenox, Massachusetts) in 1946 and took pictures for The New York Times, Life, Look, and Collier’s magazines and other media outlets. She traveled to Israel in 1951 as a photographer for Life to document the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra. She spent some 10 weeks there photographing people throughout the country. Orkin and Engel collaborated on the film Little Fugitive (1953), which follows a young boy who has run away from home to Coney Island under the false impression that he has killed his older brother. The film won the Silver Lion at the 1953 Venice Film Festival and was nominated for an Academy Award for writing in 1954. French filmmaker François Truffaut is noted as having credited Little Fugitive as a significant influence on his 1959 film The 400 Blows and, more broadly, on French New Wave. During the 1950s Orkin participated in two significant photography exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art in New York: “Young Photographers” (1950) and “The Family of Man” (1955). She and Engel also collaborated on the film Lovers and Lollipops (1956). After that film Orkin began to concentrate once more on still photography.
She had her first retrospective in 1974 in New York. During the 1970s she taught classes at the School of Visual Arts and worked on a long series of photographs that she took from her 15th-floor window overlooking Central Park. Those images were published as two widely acclaimed books, A World Through My Window (1978) and More Pictures from My Window (1983). She died at age 63 after a long battle with cancer.
