Thérèse Bonney, in full Mabel Thérèse Bonney,  (born 1894?, Syracuse, New York, U.S.—died January 15, 1978, Paris, France), American photographer and writer remembered chiefly for her pictures portraying the ravages of World War II in Europe.
Bonney grew up in New York and California. She graduated from the University of California, took a master’s degree in Romance languages at Harvard University, and, after a short time at Columbia University in New York City, completed her doctorate of letters at the Sorbonne in Paris. In 1919 she founded the European branch of the American Red Cross Correspondence Exchange.
In the early 1930s Bonney amassed an impressive collection of photographs and organized several exhibitions to put them on display. During that period she also established the Bonney Service, a press service supplying illustrations to newspapers and magazines in 33 countries. In 1935 Bonney moved to New York City to become director of the new Maison Française, a gallery in Rockefeller Center dedicated to fostering better cultural understanding between France and the United States. Within a few years, Bonney herself took up photography, and in 1938 she published a behind-the-scenes series of photographs of the Vatican for Life (later published as a book in 1939).
When Bonney traveled to Finland in November 1939 to photograph preparations for the 1940 Olympic Games, she instead became the only photojournalist at the scene of the Russian invasion of Finland. In May 1940, while in France, she was the only foreign journalist present at the battle between French and German forces at the Meuse River. Her photographs of the war were exhibited at the Library of Congress and across the United States.
In 1941 Bonney traveled again throughout Europe. Her photos from that trip were published as Europe’s Children (1943)—a moving, even shocking, portrayal of the effects of war. In 1944 the photographs from her first solo exhibition were published in book form. After the war she resumed residence in France, where she continued to photograph, wrote a column for Le Figaro, and translated a number of French plays for Broadway production.
