Tina Modotti, original name Assunta Adelaide Luigia Modotti,  (born August 16, 1896, Udine, Italy—died January 6, 1942, Mexico City, Mexico), photographer who was noted for her symbolic close-ups and images of Mexican workers.
Modotti spent most of her childhood in Austria, where her parents were migrant labourers. The family returned to Udine, Italy, where the young Modotti worked in a textile factory. She traveled to the United States in 1913 and joined her father and sister in San Francisco. There she became a popular actress on the Italian-language stage. In 1918 she moved to Los Angeles with her companion, American artist and writer Roubaix de l’Abrie Richey (known as “Robo”). In Los Angeles Modotti acted in three silent films and modeled for photographer Edward Weston, with whom she became romantically involved. In 1923 she and Weston moved to Mexico City and opened a portrait studio. Modotti first served as the studio manager, but after learning photography from Weston she became a full partner.
Modotti’s early images include still lifes, architectural studies, and portraits. Following Weston’s lead, she worked from the premise that photographers should make full use of their medium’s unique capabilities.  Her meticulously composed and finely detailed images of decontextualized objects, places, and people attest to his influence. The couple moved in the same circles as artists Diego Rivera and David Alfaro Siqueiros, writer Anita Brenner, and other cultural figures. In 1926 Modotti and Weston took the photographs for Brenner’s landmark book on Mexican art, Idols Behind Altars: The Story of the Mexican Spirit (1929). In addition, Modotti documented murals by Rivera, José Clemente Orozco, and other leading artists.
From 1925 on, Modotti was active in leftist politics. Her pivotal 1926 photograph Workers Parade reflects her concern for class solidarity among Mexican workers. After joining the Communist Party in 1927, she made images such as Mexican Sombrero with Hammer and Sickle, symbolizing communist ideology and marrying formal elegance with highly charged political content. She collaborated with working-class people to create photographs intended to enhance their class consciousness and convey their dignity and worth. Her photographs for the communist newspaper El Machete were among the earliest examples of critical photojournalism in Mexico.
In 1929 Modotti was framed for the murder of her companion, Julio Antonio Mella, a founder of the Cuban Communist Party. Though she was acquitted of the murder, Modotti was caught in a web of political intrigue. In 1930 she was jailed for her alleged participation in an attempted assassination of Mexican Pres. Pascual Ortiz Rubio and was then deported from Mexico. She photographed briefly and without distinction in Berlin before moving to Moscow. There she more or less abandoned photography in order to devote her energies to International Red Aid, the Comintern’s international social service agency. Modotti became the companion of Italian Stalinist Vittorio Vidali, a suspect in Mella’s death.
After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, Modotti traveled to Spain, where she undertook humanitarian and political work for International Red Aid in support of the Republican cause. Upon the fascist victory in 1939, she fled to France and then to Mexico, where she lived semiclandestinely. She died unexpectedly in 1942. Although a forensic report named heart disease as Modotti’s cause of death, suspicions have persisted that she was murdered by Vidali in the service of the communists.
Modotti’s beauty, dramatic life, and active involvement in communist politics have often overshadowed her contributions to photography. Although her photographic career spanned only about seven years, she developed an original approach to political photography. Her images remain emblematic of postrevolutionary Mexico.
