Weegee, byname of Arthur Fellig, original name Usher Fellig,  (born June 12, 1899, Złoczew, Austria-Hungary [now in Poland]—died Dec. 26, 1968, New York, N.Y., U.S.), photojournalist noted for his gritty yet compassionate images of the aftermath of New York street crimes and disasters.
Weegee’s father, Bernard Fellig, immigrated to the United States in 1906 and was followed four years later by his wife and four children, including Usher, the second-born. At  Ellis Island, Usher became Arthur. The boy dropped out of school in his early teens to help support the family. In 1923 he took a job in the darkroom of Acme Newspictures, where he was able occasionally to photograph at night. In addition to his work for Acme, he held a series of low-paying jobs until 1935, when he became a freelance photographer for a number of New York newspapers. Legend has it that his uncanny ability to appear with his camera at crime scenes as the police arrived—or sometimes even before—led to the moniker “Weegee,” a phonetic spelling of the first word in Ouija board, a device used in occultism to receive messages from the spirit world.
For much of his career, Weegee was, in his own words, “spellbound by the mystery of murder.” His images have the air of a still from a film noir, photographed as they were usually at night and often with infrared film and flash. He paid special attention to the expressions and gestures of his subjects, who for the most part came from the lower strata of New York society. His feelings about privileged New Yorkers were typified in a photograph entitled The Critic, in which an ill-clothed onlooker hisses at two bejeweled women attending the opera. In 1945 Naked City, the first of Weegee’s five books, was published; the title and film rights were later sold to a Hollywood producer.
From 1947 to 1952 Weegee lived in Hollywood, acting as technical advisor, playing bit parts in a few films, and photographing material that was published in 1953 as Naked Hollywood. By the time he returned to New York City, his most enduring work had been done. Upon his return he embarked on a series of photo distortions, but these caricatures of famous persons were not well-received. In 1961 his autobiography, Weegee by Weegee, was published. His uncanny ability to capture a dramatic segment of New York street life remains his most significant contribution to photography.
