Amnesty International (AI),  international nongovernmental organization (NGO) founded in London on May 28, 1961, that seeks to publicize violations by governments and other entities of rights recognized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), especially freedom of speech and of conscience and the right against torture. AI actively seeks the release of political prisoners and the relief, when necessary, of their families. It also works with intergovernmental human rights bodies to expand and enforce human rights protections in international law. In 1977 AI was awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace. In the early 21st century the organization consisted of national sections, or offices, in more than 50 countries and some three million individual members, donors, and affiliated activists in more than 150 countries and territories. Its logo is a burning candle wrapped in barbed wire. Headquarters are in London.
The organization was founded through the principal efforts of the British attorney Peter Benenson, who had defended political prisoners in Hungary, South Africa, and Spain and who sought to establish a collective agency for the advancement of human rights. From 1961 to 1975 the chairman of AI was Seán MacBride, who was a corecipient of the 1974 Nobel Prize for Peace.
AI exposes human rights violations by governments, armed political groups, companies, and other nonstate actors in newsletters, annual reports, and background papers. It relies strongly on the worldwide distribution of “adoption groups,” each of which, staffed by three to eight persons, takes on a limited number of cases of prisoners of conscience and barrages the offending government with letters of protest until the prisoners are released. Other activities include organizing demonstrations and vigils, sponsoring human rights education, and circulating online petitions and alerts. The research department at AI’s London headquarters is in contact with human rights activists and other interested parties around the world and provides a network of information for all the organization’s publications and activities.
AI is governed by an international executive committee headed by a chairman. Members of the executive committee are elected to staggered four-year terms at a biennial meeting of the International Council, which comprises representatives of all national sections. The day-to-day operations of the organization are overseen by an international secretariat headed by a secretary-general, who is appointed by the executive committee.
