Arab oil embargo,  temporary cessation of oil shipments from the Middle East to the United States, the Netherlands, Portugal, Rhodesia, and South Africa, imposed by oil-producing Arab countries in October 1973 in retaliation for  support of Israel during the Yom Kippur War; the embargo on the United States was lifted in March 1974, though the embargo on the other countries remained in place for some time afterward. The Arab oil embargo was the first oil crisis, an oil-supply disruption leading to major price increases and a worldwide energy crisis. The embargo caused the United States and western European countries to reassess their dependence upon Middle Eastern oil. It also led to far-reaching changes in domestic energy policy, including increased domestic oil production in the United States and a greater emphasis on improving energy efficiency.
On October 6, 1973, Egypt and Syria launched a surprise attack against Israel on the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur. Egyptian and Syrian forces made early gains across the Suez Canal and Golan Heights, but Israel quickly turned the tide, and within a few weeks Israeli troops had pushed forward into Egyptian and Syrian territory. In an attempt to pressure Western countries to force Israel to withdraw from seized lands, Arab members of OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) announced sharp production cuts and then banned the sale of oil to the United States and the Netherlands. Until that time, OPEC, which was formed in 1960, had kept a relatively low profile, mainly negotiating with international oil companies for better terms for member countries.
Enmity toward the United States among OPEC members had risen in the years preceding the embargo as a result of actions taken by U.S. President Richard M. Nixon to boost the sluggish American economy. For example, Nixon ordered the release of the dollar from the gold standard, which had been in place since the end of World War II. The resulting devaluation of the currency led to financial losses on the part of oil-producing countries, whose revenues consisted largely of U.S. dollars. Enormous increases in Western oil consumption—more than doubling over approximately the preceding 25 years—also contributed to the severity of the crisis, as people in the developed world had become accustomed to cheap gasoline and relatively stable prices.
After the imposition of the embargo, the price of a barrel of oil quadrupled by 1974. As a result, the United States experienced its first fuel shortage and first significant increase in gasoline prices since World War II. In response to the embargo, the U.S. government imposed fuel rationing and lowered speed limits to reduce consumption. Nixon seriously considered military action to seize oil fields in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Abu Dhabi as a last resort. However, negotiations in Washington, D.C., led to the lifting of the embargo in March 1974.
