ASEAN, in full Association of Southeast Asian Nations,  international organization established by the governments of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand in 1967 to accelerate economic growth, social progress, and cultural development and to promote peace and security in Southeast Asia. Brunei joined in 1984, followed by Vietnam in 1995, Laos and Myanmar in 1997, and Cambodia in 1999. The ASEAN region has a population of more than 600 million and covers a total area of 1.7 million square miles (4.5 million square km). ASEAN replaced the Association of South East Asia (ASA), which had been formed by the Philippines, Thailand, and the Federation of Malaya (now part of Malaysia) in 1961. Under the banner of cooperative peace and shared prosperity, ASEAN’s chief projects centre on economic cooperation, the promotion of trade among ASEAN countries and between ASEAN members and the rest of the world, and programs for joint research and technical cooperation among member governments.
Held together somewhat tenuously in its early years, ASEAN achieved a new cohesion in the mid-1970s following the changed balance of power in Southeast Asia after the end of the Vietnam War. The region’s dynamic economic growth during the 1970s strengthened the organization, enabling ASEAN to adopt a unified response to Vietnam’s invasion of Cambodia in 1979. ASEAN’s first summit meeting, held in Bali, Indonesia, in 1976, resulted in an agreement on several industrial projects and the signing of a Treaty of Amity and Cooperation and a Declaration of Concord.
The end of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union at the end of the 1980s allowed ASEAN countries to exercise greater political independence in the region, and in the 1990s ASEAN emerged as a leading voice on regional trade and security issues. For example, ASEAN adopted a declaration to resolve disputes in the South China Sea, promoted dialogue on regional security by establishing the ASEAN Regional Forum, and worked to resolve the conflict in East Timor. In 1992 members reduced intraregional tariffs and eased restrictions on foreign investment by creating the ASEAN Free Trade Area.
To signal ASEAN’s commitment to international diplomacy, human rights, and democratic values, its member countries signed the ASEAN Charter in 2007. Following its ratification by all 10 member states, the charter entered into force in December 2008. Among other things, the charter conferred legal personality on ASEAN, increased the frequency of ASEAN summit meetings, and established the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights.
ASEAN summit meetings, which have been scheduled to occur semiannually since the adoption of the charter, bring together the heads of state of member countries; there are also annual conferences for foreign ministers. Relations between ASEAN and other countries are conducted through ASEAN Plus Three, an annual meeting of the heads of state of ASEAN members and the leaders of China, the Republic of Korea, and Japan; ASEAN Plus Six, which includes ASEAN Plus Three and Australia, India, and New Zealand; and the East Asia Summit, a meeting of ASEAN Plus Six and Russia and the United States. Between ASEAN summit meetings the organization’s business is directed by a standing committee consisting of the foreign minister of the host country of the ministerial conferences and ambassadors from the other countries. A permanent secretariat in Jakarta, Indonesia, is headed by a secretary-general, whose position rotates every five years. The organization encompasses a number of committees, including technical committees on finance, agriculture, industry, trade, and transportation. The committees are supplemented by working groups headed by experts and various private-sector organizations.
