Baltic Entente,   mutual-defense pact signed by Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia on Sept. 12, 1934, that laid the basis for close cooperation among those states, particularly in foreign affairs. Shortly after World War I, efforts were made to conclude a Baltic defense alliance among Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland, all of which had recently broken away from the Russian Empire to form independent states and feared the aggressive policies of Soviet Russia. But by the mid-1920s, when negotiations had failed to produce an agreement, the idea of a broad Baltic league was dropped in favour of a pact among Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Latvia and Estonia had formalized a bilateral-defense agreement in November 1923, and, after they renewed it in February 1934, they invited Lithuania to join their alliance. On Sept. 12, 1934, the three nations signed the Treaty of Understanding and Cooperation at Geneva.
Aimed mainly against Nazi Germany, which had replaced the Soviet Union as the most likely aggressor, the treaty, which was to last for 10 years, provided for mutual-defense assistance in case of attack and for semiannual foreign ministers’ meetings to coordinate the signatories’ foreign policies and diplomatic activities. It also pledged the three countries not only to confer with each other on all foreign-policy matters of mutual concern (excluding Lithuania’s outstanding territorial disputes with Germany over Klaipėda [German: Memel] and with Poland over Vilnius) but also to give each other diplomatic and political aid. As a result, the three Baltic nations sent only a single representative to all international conferences, including the meetings of the League of Nations; in 1936 Latvia, as a representative of all three states, was elected a nonpermanent member of the League’s council. The pact, which was successful in stimulating close cooperation in cultural and economic as well as foreign affairs, failed, however, as a means of defense. Notwithstanding their declaration of neutrality (1938), the Baltic-pact members were not able to defend their independent status. Under the German-Soviet Pact of August 1939, the Baltic States were recognized as belonging to the Soviet sphere of interest; they were unable to prevent being annexed in 1940 by the Soviet Union. 

