Brezhnev Doctrine,  foreign policy put forth by Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev in 1968, calling on the Soviet Union to intervene—including militarily—in countries where socialist rule was under threat.
The doctrine was largely a response to the Prague Spring, a period of liberalization instituted in the Soviet-bloc country Czechoslovakia by newly installed leader Alexander Dubček in 1968. It was viewed as a counterrevolution by officials in Moscow, and at a meeting of Warsaw Pact countries on August 3, Brezhnev first presented his doctrine. He notably stated that all socialist countries had a duty to support and defend socialist gains. Less than three weeks later, on August 20, Soviet forces invaded Czechoslovakia, and hard-liners were ultimately returned to power; Dubček was later deposed.
The Brezhnev Doctrine was more formally presented in an official document—known as “Sovereignty and the International Obligations of Socialist Countries”—that was published in September 1968 in Pravda, the newspaper of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It stated that while socialist countries should be free to determine their path, “none of their decisions should damage either socialism in their country or the fundamental interests of other socialist countries.”  In November Brezhnev further elaborated on the policy—which detractors called the Doctrine of Limited Sovereignty—particularly noting the threat of capitalism to the socialist commonwealth and calling military assistance “extraordinary.”
The Brezhnev Doctrine severely limited reforms by Soviet-bloc countries in the ensuing decades.  In addition, it was used to justify the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. The Soviets sought to prop up the country’s communist government in its battle with anticommunist Muslim guerrillas. After Brezhnev’s death in 1982, his doctrine largely remained in effect until Mikhail Gorbachev became the Soviet leader in 1985. Faced with a changing political climate, Gorbachev abandoned the Brezhnev Doctrine. In 1988 he withdrew troops from Afghanistan, and later that year he refused to intervene as a wave of democratization swept through Eastern Europe. In 1991 the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
