Brinkmanship,   foreign policy practice in which one or both parties force the interaction between them to the threshold of confrontation in order to gain an advantageous negotiation position over the other. The technique is characterized by aggressive risk-taking policy choices that court potential disaster.
Although the practice of brinkmanship has probably existed since the dawn of human history, the origin of the word comes from a 1956 Life magazine interview with former U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles, in which he claimed that, in diplomacy, “The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art...if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.” In response, American politician and diplomat Adlai Stevenson derided Dulles’s “brinkmanship” as reckless. The term was used repeatedly during the Cold War, a period characterized by tense relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. It marked a significant change in the conduct of foreign policy. Whereas the interaction between states had previously been predicated on the balance of power—largely based on a state’s economic and military power and the desire to prevent any major shifts in the status quo—a state’s possession of nuclear weapons created an entirely new set of foreign policy tools, which it could use to influence others.
Perhaps the best-documented case of brinkmanship was the Soviet placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 and the U.S. response, which is now referred to as the Cuban missile crisis. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sought to defend Cuba from the U.S. and to extend Soviet strategic power in the region by secretly placing medium- and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, which threatened much of the continental United States. Instead of gaining a leveraged position over the U.S., Khrushchev’s brinkmanship almost brought the U.S. and Soviet Union to nuclear war. The crisis concluded after U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy revealed the presence of Khrushchev’s weapons and ordered a naval “quarantine” (or blockade) around Cuba, which resulted in the Soviet Union withdrawing its missiles.
