Brookings Institution,  not-for-profit research organization based in Washington, D.C., founded in 1916 as the Institute for Government Research by the merchant, manufacturer, and philanthropist Robert S. Brookings and other reformers. In 1927 it merged with two other institutions established by Brookings, the Institute of Economics (1922) and the Robert S. Brookings Graduate School of Economics and Government (1924), to form the Brookings Institution. Devoted to public service through research and education in the social sciences, particularly in economics, government, and foreign policy, the Brookings Institution is one of the most influential think tanks in the United States.
Throughout its history, the institution has had a significant impact on U.S. policy decisions, both domestically and abroad. William F. Willoughby, a Johns Hopkins University graduate statistician and one of the early directors of the institution, helped the institute play an important role in the crafting of the 1921 legislation that led to the creation of the first U.S. Bureau of the Budget, the predecessor of the Office of Management and Budget. During the 1930s, as the Great Depression continued, Harold Moulton, a University of Chicago professor who was the institution’s first president, and his colleagues at Brookings participated in a large-scale study commissioned by U.S. Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt to analyze the underlying causes of the depression and come up with viable remedies.
During World War II, Brookings researchers turned their efforts to aiding the administration with a series of studies on mobilization. In 1948 the institution played a key role in crafting the administration plan of the European Recovery Program (Marshall Plan), which distributed aid to Europe’s war-torn economies.
In 1952 Robert Calkins succeeded Moulton as president of the institution. He was instrumental in placing Brookings on strong financial ground by securing grants from the Rockefeller and Ford foundations. The institute expanded and was reorganized into three areas: economic studies, government studies, and foreign policy programs.
In the 1970s the institution played a prominent role in the creation of the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO). In 1975 Alice Rivlin, a Brookings economist, became the CBO’s first director.
The institution’s research into improving the U.S. tax system, spearheaded by Director of Economic Studies Joseph Pechman, led to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which was a significant congressional bill that introduced important simplifications to the U.S. income tax code.
In the 1990s the institution further expanded to include new interdisciplinary research centres such as the Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy and the Center for Northeast Asian Policy Studies. Brookings researchers played a prominent role in crafting U.S. Pres. Bill Clinton’s welfare-reform legislation that was signed into law in 1996.
In 2002 Brookings launched the Saban Center for Middle East Policy as its new hub of research directed at U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East. That was followed by the creation of the Brookings-Tsinghua Center for Public Policy in Beijing in 2006 and the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar in 2007.
The Brookings Institution produces influential research on a broad set of public policy topics ranging from domestic issues in the U.S. to international affairs. It publishes regular reports, books, and Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, one of the premier economics research journals.
