Convention on Cluster Munitions,  international treaty, adopted by more than 100 countries on May 30, 2008, that prohibited the manufacture, transfer, and use of cluster munitions. It entered into force on Aug. 1, 2010.
Cluster munitions are characterized as bombs or shells that consist of an outer casing that houses dozens, or even hundreds, of smaller submunitions. These submunitions—which can include bomblets (antimateriel weapons that utilize small parachutes to aid in guidance), grenades (antipersonnel weapons that detonate on or shortly after impact), or mines (area denial weapons that detonate in response to pressure or in the presence of a metal object)—are ejected from the dispensing ordnance and scattered over a wide area. Like traditional land mines, unexploded munitions have the potential to pose a threat for years after the conclusion of an armed conflict.
After organizations such as the International Campaign to Ban Landmines successfully lobbied for the adoption of the Mine Ban Treaty in 1997, human rights groups sought to address the similar danger posed by cluster munitions. Unexploded ordnance (UXO) generated by cluster munitions, used extensively by NATO forces in the Kosovo conflict, resulted in more than 150 post-combat casualties. Reports by Human Rights Watch and the International Committee of the Red Cross found that an estimated 10 percent of the 289,000 submunitions scattered across Kosovo’s countryside had failed to detonate on deployment, making them a persistent and volatile explosive threat. Such figures emphasize the danger posed by cluster submunitions, which, because of their higher explosive yield, are more likely than land mines to result in one or more fatalities upon accidental detonation.
In 2003 various nongovernmental organizations gathered as the Cluster Munition Coalition, and the United Nations proposed a moratorium on the use of cluster munitions. The following year the European Parliament called upon European Union members to cease the production, export, and use of cluster munitions and to work toward an international treaty restricting their use. This treaty began to take shape in 2006 during a review of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, a series of protocols that limited the use of weapons deemed to be excessively injurious (such as lasers or incendiary weapons) or indiscriminate (land mines, UXO). Over the next two years a series of international meetings were convened to negotiate the text of the agreement, culminating with the Dublin Diplomatic Conference on Cluster Munitions in May 2008. The Convention on Cluster Munitions was opened for signature in December 2008 and took effect in August 2010.
In addition to banning the use, manufacture, and transfer of cluster munitions, the treaty bound signatories to destroy existing stores of cluster munitions within 8 years, to clear areas contaminated with cluster submunitions within 10 years, and to provide aid to communities affected by their use. Among the countries that have yet to adopt the Convention on Cluster Munitions are China, Russia, and the United States.
