Democratic Party of Korea (DP), Korean Daeburo Minjudang,  centrist-liberal political party in South Korea. The party supports greater human rights, improved relations with North Korea, and an economic policy described as “new progressivism.”
The party was founded by Kim Dae-Jung in 1995 as the National Congress for New Politics. Three years later, in the wake of corruption scandals within the ruling New Korea Party (which in 1997 had merged with the Democratic Party formed in 1991 to become the Grand National Party [GNP; now Saenuri Party]), Kim became the first opposition leader to be elected president of South Korea. In 2000 the party changed its name to the Millennium Democratic Party (MDP). After disappointing results for the MDP in the 2001 by-elections, in which the party lost its slim majority in the legislature, Kim resigned as the party leader.
Upon the election of Pres. Roh Moo-Hyun in 2002, the party splintered over ideological differences, and Roh’s supporters established the Uri Party in 2003. In the 2004 elections the MDP retained only 9 seats in the National Assembly, while the Uri Party captured a majority, winning 152 of a possible 299 seats. Just prior to the parliamentary elections, the MDP sided with the conservative GNP and voted to impeach Roh for electoral misconduct. However, the move was highly unpopular with the Korean public (as reflected in the elections), and the MDP subsequently changed its name to the Democratic Party to distance itself from the issue. The Uri Party, unable to capitalize on its legislative majority, lost ground through a series of by-elections, and its popularity dropped significantly.
In anticipation of the 2007 presidential election, liberal politicians reorganized, disbanding the Uri Party and merging with a host of smaller parties under the banner of the United New Democratic Party (UNDP). In 2008, after much negotiation and following a landslide victory by GNP presidential candidate Lee Myung-Bak, DP members reunited with their former colleagues in the UNDP to form the United Democratic Party (UDP). In the legislative elections that year, the UDP lost its majority in the National Assembly to the GNP. After the 2008 elections the UDP modified its name to Democratic Party (DP). In December 2011 the DP merged with two smaller factions, resulting in another name change—this time to Democratic United Party (DUP). DUP candidate Moon Jae-In finished second to Park Geun-Hye of the Saenuri Party in the 2012 presidential election.
The DUP became the Democratic Party in 2013, and the following year it merged with the New Politics party to become the New Politics Alliance for Democracy. A faction led by Ahn Cheol-Soo broke away in 2016 to form the People’s Party, and those who remained in the renamed Democratic Party coalesced around Moon. As an influence-peddling scandal engulfed the Park presidency, the DP was among the forces calling for her impeachment. Park’s removal from office was confirmed by the Supreme Court on March 10, 2017, and a snap presidential election was scheduled for May 9, 2017. Moon handily won that contest, returning the liberals to the Blue House for the first time in a decade.
