Foreign dependency,  global power structure in which weaker countries are economically reliant on stronger countries, allowing the stronger countries to exercise significant control over the weaker countries’ economic and political behaviour. Foreign dependency generally fosters underdevelopment in the dependent country; a country’s adoption of policies tailored to the interests of a stronger country may inhibit the weaker country’s domestic growth, speed environmental destruction, or create temporary growth that precludes sustainable development and economic independence.
Some experts regard foreign dependency as an extension of colonial trade patterns. Less-developed countries are often former colonies whose economies were focused on the production of raw materials destined for the manufacturing industries of their colonial masters. Upon achieving independence, few former colonies had modern industrial economies or trained workforces that could compete in the global marketplace, so they continued to export cheap raw materials to former colonial powers. The industrial countries then sold manufactured goods back to their former colonies at a profit.
Dependency on foreign aid can also play a significant role in shaping the economy and politics of the recipient country. Although foreign aid can have positive economic and political impacts, such as increasing political participation and local public expenditures on social programs in developing countries, donor countries often use promises of aid (or threats of stopping aid) to pressure recipients into adopting the political or economic policies preferred by the donor.
The latter problem is particularly important with regard to loan acceptance. A country that obtains loans from the World Bank, for example, must agree to adjust its economic structure, liberalize its economy, and increase its international financial accountability. Moreover, paying off the debt from loans often leads to balance-of-payments difficulties for the recipient, further sustaining and deepening its economic dependency.
Less-developed countries’ reliance on foreign capital can also perpetuate dependency. Much of the financial capital available in a developing country arrives from outside its borders. That capital may take the form of foreign aid or foreign direct investment (FDI), which includes activities such as hosting foreign firms that provide jobs, increase domestic capital flows, and generate tax dollars. However, FDI also may generate problems. Foreign firms from developed nations typically dominate the local market, preventing or discouraging the development of local industries. Moreover, the administration of the host country may be asked to provide tax incentives to keep the foreign company in the country. The host country may also relax workplace or environmental regulations to induce foreign companies to establish or maintain businesses there.
