Franco-American Alliance,   (Feb. 6, 1778), agreement by France to furnish critically needed military aid and loans to the 13 insurgent American colonies, often considered the turning point of the U.S. War of Independence. Resentful over the loss of its North American empire after the French and Indian War, France welcomed the opportunity to undermine Britain’s position in the New World.
Though maintaining a position of neutrality from 1775 to 1777, France was already secretly furnishing the American colonists with munitions and loans. As early as 1776, the Continental Congress had established a joint diplomatic commission—composed of Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, and Arthur Lee—to seek recognition and financial aid from the Bourbon monarchy. The colonists’ victory at the Battle of Saratoga (Oct. 17, 1777) was the show of strength needed to convince France that the revolutionaries would pursue the war to final victory. Hastening to act before the British peace overtures of the Carlisle Commission could tempt the colonists, the French foreign minister, the comte de Vergennes, succeeded in concluding the alliance the following February.
Two treaties were signed. The first, a treaty of amity and commerce, officially recognized the new country and encouraged Franco-American trade. The second provided for a military alliance against Great Britain and also required recognition of absolute independence for the United States as a condition of peace. In addition, peace could be arrived at only by mutual French and U.S. consent. Finally, France renounced all territorial claims in North America east of the Mississippi River and in Bermuda, and it agreed to guarantee whatever U.S. boundaries existed at the war’s end in exchange for U.S. guarantees of French possessions in the West Indies.
The alliance greatly facilitated U.S. independence. The French fleet proceeded to challenge British control of North American waters and, together with troops and arms, proved an indispensable asset in the revolutionaries’ victory at the Siege of Yorktown (1781), which ended the war. Later, however, the treaties proved embarrassing to the United States, threatening to involve the country in the French Revolutionary wars. After several years of strained relations, France and the United States agreed to the Treaty of Morfontaine (Sept. 30, 1800) to abrogate both 1778 treaties.
