Girl Guides and Girl Scouts,  worldwide organizations for girls, dedicated to training them in good citizenship, good conduct, and outdoor activities. Robert (later Lord) Baden-Powell and his sister Agnes Baden-Powell founded the Girl Guides in Great Britain in 1910 in response to the requests of girls who were interested in the Boy Scout movement established by Robert in 1908. In 1912 Juliette Gordon Low founded a Girl Guide organization in the United States, and its name was later changed to Girl Scouts of the United States of America. Other countries subsequently adopted Girl Guiding and Girl Scouting programs, and the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts was formed in 1928. In the early 21st century there were more than 10 million Girl Guides and Girl Scouts worldwide.
Aims and activities are substantially the same in all countries in which the movement is organized. The girls promise to follow a code of behaviour, undertake community service projects, and try to develop their skills by earning proficiency badges in a wide variety of activities including outdoor recreation, writing, cooking, performing arts, first aid, and finance—the latter often revolving around the annual fund-raising sale of cookies, for which Girl Scouts and Girl Guides are best known to many. Badge and uniform types vary by country and are often determined by age group.
In the United States there are six age groups, which correspond to school grades: Daisy (grades K–1), Brownie (2–3), Junior (4–5), Cadette (6–8), Senior (9–10), and Ambassador (11–12). Adults are also permitted to join the Girl Scouts as mentors, volunteers, or troop leaders.
In Great Britain there are the Rainbows (ages 5–7; 4–7 in Northern Ireland), Brownies (7–10), Guides (10–14), and Senior Section (14–25). Non-volunteer adults may join for an annual subscription fee.
In Australia the formal grouping system has been largely discontinued, with all Girl Guides under age 18 referred to simply as Guides, and adults 18–30 are eligible for membership in the Olave Program. Those over 18 also may become Adult Members or Trefoil Members (the latter if they have served as either a Guide or a leader). Individual troops, however, are free to continue using the age group names or to make up their own.
