International Maritime Organization (IMO),  formerly (1948–82) Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative Organization,  United Nations (UN) specialized agency created to develop international treaties and other mechanisms on maritime safety; to discourage discriminatory and restrictive practices in international trade and unfair practices by shipping concerns; and to reduce maritime pollution. The IMO has also been involved in maritime-related liability and compensation cases. Headquartered in London, the IMO was created by a convention adopted at the UN Maritime Conference in 1948. The convention came into force on March 17, 1958, after it was ratified by 21 countries—seven of which were required to have at least one million gross tons of shipping. Its current name was adopted in 1982.
The IMO has more than 170 members and is headed by a secretary-general, who serves a four-year term and oversees a Secretariat staff of approximately 300—one of the smallest UN agency staffs. All members are represented in the Assembly, the IMO’s primary policy-making body, which meets once every two years. The Council, consisting of 40 members, meets twice annually and is responsible for governing the organization between Assembly sessions. Membership on the Council is divided among three groups: (1) the 8 countries with the “largest interest” in providing international shipping services; (2) the 8 countries with the largest interest in providing international seaborne trade; and (3) 16 countries with a “special interest” in maritime transport, selected to ensure equitable geographic representation. Safety proposals are submitted to the Assembly by the Maritime Safety Committee, which meets annually. There are a number of other committees and subcommittees dealing with specific issues, such as the environment, legal issues, the transport of dangerous goods, radio communications, fire protection, ship design and equipment, lifesaving appliances, and cargoes and containers. The IMO’s Global Maritime Distress and Safety System, an integrated communications system using satellites and terrestrial radio communications to provide aid to ships in distress even in cases where the crew is unable to send a manual distress signal, was established in 1992 and became fully operational in 1999.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the IMO adopted several new conventions related to the maritime environment, including one prohibiting the use of harmful chemicals in antifouling systems (2001), which prevent the accumulation of barnacles and other marine growth on ship hulls, and another aimed at ballast-water management (2004). Following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks,  in the United States, the IMO increased its efforts in the area of maritime security. In 2002 it adopted several amendments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, deemed the most important international maritime-safety treaty, and in 2004 it enforced a new international shipping security regime. In the following year the IMO amended the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation by enhancing the boarding and extradition rights of member states.
