International Council of Christians and Jews (ICCJ),  umbrella organization of national associations dedicated to encouraging Jewish-Christian dialogue. The International Council of Christians and Jews was founded in 1946 in the aftermath of the Holocaust as a way to encourage interfaith dialogue and understanding between Jews and Christians. The ICCJ’s “An Address to the Churches,” presented at the 1947 Emergency Conference on Antisemitism in Seelisberg, Switz., was one of the first public attempts by Christians to come to terms with the Holocaust. The organization is headquartered in the Martin Buber House in Heppenheim, Ger., the former home of German-Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, who was forced to flee Germany under the threat of Nazi persecution.
Among the ICCJ’s self-described goals are promoting understanding and respect between Jews and Christians through regular conferences, countering racism and prejudice and the misuse of religion, and performing outreach in areas of the world that lack structured Jewish-Christian dialogue. The organization also presents the Interfaith Gold Medallion Peace Through Dialogue award for outstanding contributions to interfaith understanding.
With its founding in 1995 of the Abrahamic Forum Council, the ICCJ added to its core mission of encouraging Jewish-Christian dialogue the goal of promoting dialogue between Jews, Christians, and Muslims. The ICCJ’s Women’s Council, founded in 1998, was an outgrowth of women’s seminars held regularly from 1988. The youth branch of the ICCJ, the Young Leadership Council, hosts a yearly international conference.
The ICCJ is made up of several dozen member organizations in some 30 countries. They include the National Conference for Community and Justice in the United States, the Interreligious Coordinating Council in Israel, the Canadian Council of Christians and Jews, and other organizations in Europe, South America, Australia, and New Zealand. Funding for the ICCJ comes from private sponsorships and conference fees. 
