Macedonian Question,  dispute that dominated politics in the southern Balkans from the late 19th century through the early 21st century. Initially, the Macedonian Question involved Greece, Bulgaria, and, to a lesser extent, Serbia in a conflict over which state would be able to impose its own national identity on the ethnically, linguistically, and religiously diverse population of the region traditionally called Macedonia. In that way, each state attempted to gain possession of the territory of Macedonia itself.
After the Balkan Wars (1912–13), the geographical area of Macedonia, which had been part of the Ottoman Empire, was divided among these three Balkan states. The southern portion of Macedonia became part of Greece, most of the northern portion became part of Serbia (later part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes and still later of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia), and a small area in the northeast became part of Bulgaria. In 1946 the Republic of Macedonia became one of the six constituent republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the Macedonian Question seemed to have been settled.
In 1991, however, when the Republic of Macedonia declared its independence from Yugoslavia, the Macedonian Question was raised again in a different, but equally contentious, form. Greece—which itself contains a region named Macedonia (Makedonía) and which claims continuity with the glorious accomplishments of Alexander the Great and the ancient Macedonians—strenuously objected to the use of a “Greek name” by a state that had a majority of citizens who were Slavs. In its effort to monopolize the name Macedonia, Greece forced the Republic of Macedonia to accept membership in the United Nations (UN) under the temporary designation “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” and prevented Macedonia  from gaining membership in the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). This “name issue” became the subject of long-running bilateral negotiations between the Republic of Macedonia  and Greece under the auspices of the UN.
After years of negotiations, in June 2018 Macedonian Prime Minister Zoran Zaev and Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras announced that an agreement (later known as the Prespa Agreement) had been reached under which Macedonia would be known both domestically and internationally as the Republic of North Macedonia or as North Macedonia for short (Macedonian: Severna Makedonija). According to the agreement, the official language of North Macedonia would be “the Macedonian language,” while the nationality of the majority of its citizens would be “Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia.” The agreement also acknowledged that the two countries understood the terms “Macedonia” and “Macedonian” to refer to different histories, cultures, and heritages. In other words, each country would use the terms with different meanings. More specifically, the two countries agreed that the Macedonian language and other aspects of the history and culture of the Macedonians “are not related to the ancient Hellenic civilization history, culture, and heritage” of the northern region of Greece. In this way, Greece firmly rejected any claims Macedonians might make to the glories of Alexander the Great and the ancient Macedonians that Greece has always maintained as its exclusive national heritage.
In January 2019 the parliaments of both Macedonia and Greece ratified the Prespa Agreement. Domestic reaction in both countries was largely hostile. Some Greek nationalists called for the politicians responsible for the agreement to be executed for treason. Macedonian nationalists described the agreement as a disaster. There were violent protests against the agreement in both countries. On February 12, 2019, Macedonia’s name change was officially promulgated. It appeared that the Macedonian Question, the global cultural war contested by Greece and Macedonia since the breakup of Yugoslavia and the declaration of independence by the Republic of Macedonia in 1991, might be coming to an end. See also Researcher’s Note: Macedonia: a contested name.
