New regionalism,  shift in national systems of administration and cultural, economic, and political organization following the Cold War. New regionalist projects, which began about the mid-1980s, differed in substance from the earlier rise in regionalist developments, which had begun about the 1950s and later became known by the term old regionalism. The emergence of new regionalism coincided with the end of the Cold War and a period of increasing global economic integration. Its development ultimately led to regional organizations that were more open with respect to trade than those that had formed in the era of old regionalism.
In the mid-1980s and early 1990s, with the advent or reformulation of regional organizations, such the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, the European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the Southern African Development Community (SADC), regional political and economic activity increased. This activity prompted a reinvigoration of academic interest into the phenomenon of regionalism, which led to the argument that what was being observed was a new form of regionalism, distinct from the type prevalent immediately following World War II.
Scholars identified several contours of new regionalism within the context of the political and economic world order that was emerging. Following the Cold War, the world was no longer characterized by competition between two superpowers (bipolar) but rather by the existence of a multiplicity of major powers (multipolar). This shift in the balance of power, it was argued, may have provided at least the perceived incentive for the increase in the number of regional organizations and their membership. In addition, regional organizations formed in the earlier Cold War context were shaped by the interests of the dominant superpowers. In the new context, regionalist projects were increasingly shaped by the interests of actors such as domestic civil society in addition to states themselves.
New regionalism gave rise to regional organizations that had a wide-ranging set of stated policy objectives. Whereas previous forms of regionalist projects were concerned with economic or security policies, the policies adopted by regional institutions formed or reinitiated in the late 1980s and early 1990s encompassed environmental and social policy as well as policy to encourage transparency and accountability in governance. With regard to the regional projects initiated by poor countries, such as the SADC in the southern cone of the African continent, these regional organizations included explicit developmental objectives extending beyond trade and monetary policy, considering the concept of development as a multidimensional process. Organizations such as the SADC included health, education, poverty eradication, and gender equality strategies, for instance, among their stated development objectives.
With regard to the global economy, the old form of regionalism tended toward protectionist economic blocs, where trade between member countries was encouraged but trade with countries outside the bloc was discouraged by external trade barriers. In contrast, new regionalism was more open, permitting trade with countries from outside distinct regions. In this context, it was argued that this open form offered regional industries exposure to global competition and, together with other means of encouragement, the necessary incentives to compete in the global marketplace. By this argument, scholars concluded that instead of presenting obstacles to the process of increasing global integration, these new regionalist projects assisted in furthering this objective.
Unlike old regionalism, which was oriented more toward interactions between states, new regionalism involved a variety of state and nonstate actors involved in a process of transformation of the world order. Thus, globalization affected new regionalism, which in turn participated in shaping globalization. The forces of globalization have had an impact on the restructuring of the social, political, and economic aspects of regions, while states and societies have adjusted to these impacts by furthering, changing, or reversing the effects of globalization through the processes of regionalism.
