Sand River and Bloemfontein conventions,  conventions of 1852 and 1854, respectively, between Great Britain and the Voortrekkers (Boers), who after 1835 had invaded the interior of Southern Africa north of the Orange River as part of the Great Trek. The conventions guaranteed their right to govern themselves without the interference of Great Britain.
These conventions reversed the policy of Sir Harry Smith (governor of Cape Colony and high commissioner in South Africa) of extending formal British rule beyond the frontiers of the Cape Colony. In 1848 Smith had established the Orange River Sovereignty as a new British colony. British soldiers and diplomats sent to Bloemfontein (the colony’s capital) had difficulty persuading the Boers to accept British rule, and they had worse problems in dealing with land disputes between the Boers and the Sotho (Basuto, Basotho) under the leadership of Moshoeshoe to the east. The expense involved in military operations to maintain order, in the context of the apparently valueless grasslands of the Highveld interior, induced the British to recognize Boer independence. Boers north of the Vaal River were given independence at the Sand River Convention in 1852, after which they established the South African Republic (the Transvaal), and the Orange River Sovereignty became the independent Orange Free State after the Bloemfontein Convention in 1854. Earlier British treaties with African chiefdoms, which implied protection of their lands, were canceled, and Boers were permitted access to firearms and gunpowder while Africans were not, thus shifting the balance of power in the Highveld in favour of white settlers. In effect, the Boers were to carry out the conquest of the Southern African interior without the trouble and expense falling on the British. Both conventions contained clauses prohibiting slavery, which the Boers did not observe.
The two conventions are seen by some South African historians as a tragic turning point in South African history. The abandoning of the interior by the British in the 1850s, they imply, created the conditions that led to the South African War (1899–1902) between the British and the Boers. Likewise, the retreat of British “civilizing” influences in the 1850s and the subsequent allowance of the Afrikaners (as the Boers came to be known) to dominate Union of South Africa after 1910 created the conditions for apartheid. However, this view exaggerates the differences between the way in which the British colonies and the Boer states were governed, and it minimizes the role played by South Africans of British descent in helping to create and maintain apartheid.
