Treaty of Portsmouth,  (September 5 [August 23, Old Style], 1905), peace settlement signed at Kittery, Maine, in the U.S., ending the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05. According to the terms of the treaty, which was mediated by U.S. Pres. Theodore Roosevelt, the defeated Russians recognized Japan as the dominant power in Korea and made significant territorial concessions in China.
The disastrous course of the war had greatly contributed to the outbreak of the Russian Revolution of 1905, and the surrender of Port Arthur, followed by the loss of Mukden and the devastating defeat at Tsushima, forced Nicholas II of Russia to accept Roosevelt’s proffered mediation. It was, however, the Japanese government which had taken the initiative in proposing peace negotiations. Exhausted financially and fearing a drawn-out war of attrition far from their bases, the Japanese hoped that the acute unrest in Russia would compel the government to discuss terms, and their hopes proved justified.
Negotiations began at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, on August 9, 1905, and concluded with the peace treaty signed on September 5. By the terms of the treaty, Russia agreed to surrender its leases on Port Arthur and the Liaodong Peninsula, to evacuate Manchuria, to cede the half of Sakhalin that it had annexed in 1875, and to recognize Korea as within Japan’s sphere of interest. With this treaty ended Nicholas’s Far Eastern expansionist policy, by which he had intended to establish Russian hegemony over the whole of Asia. In Japan the treaty significantly bolstered the prestige of the government’s militarist faction, and the decades after the Russo-Japanese War would see them accrue almost unchecked power.
Within two months of the treaty’s conclusion, continued unrest compelled Nicholas to issue the October Manifesto, which was the equivalent of a constitutional charter. Although its prestige was diminished, Russia nevertheless remained an Asian power, possessing as it did the railways across Siberia and northern Manchuria to Vladivostok.
