Truce of Deulino,  (December 1618), agreement suspending for 14 and a half years the hostilities between Poland and Russia that had their beginning with the death of Ivan IV (the Terrible) in 1584 and continued through a prolonged dispute over the Russian throne. The truce placed Smolensk, as well as other conquered western Russian territories, in Poland’s possession.
The policies adopted by Ivan led Russia into a state of complete disarray, and his son and heir, Fyodor, was an ineffectual ruler unsuited to the task of restoring order. He deferred to his advisers to such an extent that one, the boyar Boris Godunov, was able to assume almost total control of the government. Upon Fyodor’s death in 1598, Godunov was elected tsar. Although he was an effective ruler, his efforts to stamp out his opponents within the boyar class sparked fierce resistance, and, upon his sudden death in 1605, there arose a succession of pretenders to the throne and a period of instability known as the Time of Troubles.
The first False Dmitry—so named because he claimed to be Dmitry Ivanovich, a son of Ivan IV who had died in childhood in 1591—entered Moscow with an army of Cossacks and Polish adventurers in June 1605 and was proclaimed tsar. Within a year he was deposed by Vasily Shuysky, a boyar who ruled as tsar from 1606 to 1610. Under Shuysky, Russia went through violent upheavals caused by Cossacks, bandits, and the rise of a second False Dmitry, who defeated Shuysky and set up a government at Tushino. Shuysky responded by appealing to Sweden for military assistance in 1609, and the second False Dmitry was toppled in 1610. It was at that time that Poland, under King Sigismund III, interpreted Swedish intervention as a hostile act against Poland’s interests and invaded Russia. A Polish army laid siege to Smolensk in September 1609, and Shuysky’s enemies allied themselves to Sigismund. In February 1610 Shuysky’s forces were defeated, and Russia fell under the control of the boyar Duma (“Assembly”).
In August 1610 the leading Muscovite boyars accepted Sigismund’s son, Władysław, as tsar and opened their city’s gates to the Polish troops, but Sigismund decided that he wanted the Russian throne for himself. The Duma rejected Sigismund’s bid, which provoked Sweden to claim the throne for Swedish Prince Charles Philip. Their armies, led by Prince Dmitry Mikhaylovich Pozharsky, then forced the surrender of the Polish garrison inside the Kremlin. In January 1613 a special zemsky sobor (“assembly of the land”) named Michael Romanov the new tsar (1613). Both Sweden and Poland refused to recognize him as tsar, but in February 1617 Michael concluded a peace treaty with Sweden, regaining Novgorod and Staraya Russa for Muscovy. Władysław continued the conflict with Russia, claiming his right to the throne, even after his father had suspended his own claim. Indecisive fighting led to peace talks that culminated in 1618 with the Truce of Deulino, which concluded Władysław’s campaign.
When the truce expired in 1632, hostilities were resumed. The Russians, however, failed to regain Smolensk and accepted the Treaty of Polyanov (1634). The Russians agreed to pay 20,000 rubles to the Poles in exchange for Władysław’s recognizing Michael as the legitimate tsar of Russia.
