United Nations General Assembly,  one of the six principal organs of the United Nations (UN) and the only body in which every member of the organization is represented and allowed to vote. The first session of the assembly convened on Jan. 10, 1946, in London, with 51 countries represented. As of 2006 there were 192 members of the General Assembly. Numerous nonmembers, such as states, organizations, and other entities (e.g., the Vatican, the African Union, the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Palestine), maintain observer status, enabling them to participate in the work of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly exercises deliberative, supervisory, financial, and elective functions relating to any matter within the scope of the UN Charter. Its primary role, however, is to discuss issues and make recommendations, though it has no power to enforce its resolutions or compel state action. Other functions include admitting new members; selecting members of the Economic and Social Council, the nonpermanent members of the Security Council, and the Trusteeship Council; supervising the activities of the other UN organs, from which the General Assembly receives reports; and participating in the election of judges to the International Court of Justice and the selection of the secretary-general. Decisions usually are reached by a simple majority vote. On important questions, however—such as the admission of new members, budgetary matters, and peace and security issues—a two-thirds majority is required.
The General Assembly convenes annually and in special sessions, electing a new president each year from among five regional groups of states. At the beginning of each regular session, the General Assembly also holds a general debate, in which all members participate and may raise any issue of international concern. Most work, however, is delegated to six main committees, known as (1) Disarmament and International Security, (2) Economic and Financial, (3) Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural, (4) Special Political and Decolonization, (5) Administrative and Budgetary, and (6) Legal. (Committees are generally referred to by their number; thus, the Disarmament and International Security Committee is known as the First Committee.)
The large size of the General Assembly and the diversity of the issues it discussed contributed to the emergence of regionally based voting blocs in the 1960s. During the Cold War the Soviet Union and the countries of eastern Europe formed one of the most cohesive blocs. Since the 1980s and the end of the Cold War, blocs have formed around “North-South” economic issues—i.e., issues of disagreement between the more-prosperous, industrialized countries of the Northern Hemisphere and the poorer, less-industrialized developing countries of the Southern Hemisphere.
The number of resolutions passed by the General Assembly each year has climbed to more than 300, and many resolutions are adopted without opposition. Nevertheless, there have been sharp disagreements among members on several issues, such as those relating to the Cold War, the Arab-Israeli conflict, and human rights.
