UNOSOM, in full United Nations Operation in Somalia,  either of two United Nations (UN) peacekeeping and humanitarian missions—UNOSOM I (1992–93) and UNOSOM II (1993–95)—designed to alleviate problems in Somalia created by civil war and drought. UNOSOM I was dispatched by the UN in April 1992 to monitor the cease-fire that was in effect at the time and to protect UN personnel during their humanitarian operations. Because Somalia’s central government had collapsed, the UN was unable to seek consent to deploy troops, so the mandate was kept neutral and limited. UN personnel were to distribute humanitarian aid to alleviate the drought-created famine. More than 4,000 troops were authorized for the mission, but well under 1,000 were deployed because local warlords prevented them from moving much beyond the airport in the Somali capital, Mogadishu. Like its successor mission, UNOSOM I suffered from several problems. Troops often refused to accept orders from UN commanders before checking with their own governments, and difficulties with communicating and coordinating activities impeded the mission. The $43 million intervention had few casualties, but its effectiveness was poor.
The mission, which ended in March 1993, was supplemented, beginning in December 1992, by a UN-mandated U.S.-led peace-enforcement mission known as the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), to which 24 countries contributed some 37,000 troops. The task force’s mandate was to secure the environment to allow the provision of humanitarian relief. The more heavily armed military personnel of UNITAF had greater success than did UNOSOM I, managing to disarm several of the warring Somali clans. However, the warlords tolerated UNITAF because of the U.S. troops’ capacity to use force, the limited-time mandate of the mission, and—most significantly—because the operation did not threaten the political balance in the civil war.
In late 1992 and early 1993, the UN began planning the transition from UNITAF to a second UNOSOM action. UNOSOM II, a $1.6 billion mission, began in March 1993, with the final transfer of operations from UNITAF to UNOSOM II taking place in May. Twenty-nine countries authorized troops to pursue a highly ambitious mandate—one that went far beyond the limits of traditional neutral peacekeeping missions. The troops were to restore order to Somalia, disarm Somali civilians, and build the foundation for a stable government. Humanitarian aid, rather than being distributed according to need, was used as a reward for those who supported the mission. Moreover, the attempt to arrest Muhammad Farah Aydid, the most powerful warlord in the country, was not a neutral act. The ruling warlords profited greatly from the chaotic situation, and they strongly resisted the proposed rebuilding operations.
After planning such an ambitious operation, the UN failed to support the mission adequately. The UN resolutions that created the mission were unclear. Little attention was given to promoting stable cease-fires or preventing minor incidents from becoming larger ones. Furthermore, the UN did not obtain consent for operations from the warring parties in Somalia, a mistake that proved costly. The organization assumed that the UN flag would protect the troops, so they were lightly armed and lacked the equipment necessary in a civil-war zone. After a number of attacks on UN troops by Somali militias and a battle in Mogadishu that killed 18 U.S. soldiers, the U.S. and European participants withdrew their forces by March 1994. The UN Security Council revised UNOSOM II’s mandate in February 1994 to remove its ability to coerce cooperation.
In all, there were more than 140 UN fatalities from hostile acts. The mission ended in March 1995. Although it succeeded in protecting many civilian lives and distributing humanitarian aid, UNOSOM II did not—and could not—fulfill its mandate, and the population continued to suffer from all it had endured from 1992 onward. In addition, the mission was plagued by rampant mismanagement and corruption. Several million dollars were lost to theft, and millions more were wasted—for example, on overpriced and faulty goods.
The failure of the missions to restore order in Somalia had substantial repercussions for the country and for future UN peacekeeping operations. First, Somalia continued to be mired in internal conflict, despite the peacekeepers’ efforts. Second, the “Mogadishu syndrome”—fear of politically unpopular casualties as part of a UN mission—afterward plagued planners of peacekeeping missions in the UN and in the United States. Third, the failure in Somalia made the international community reluctant to intervene in other civil conflicts, such as the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
