Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,  an international agreement governing treaties between states that was drafted by the International Law Commission of the United Nations and adopted on May 23, 1969, and that entered into force on January 27, 1980.
A convention governing international treaties was one of the first efforts undertaken by the International Law Commission, and James Brierly was assigned as special rapporteur in 1949 to address the subject. After his resignation in 1952, each of his successors began the work anew. Sir Humphrey Waldock, appointed in 1961, produced six reports from which the commission was able to create a draft to submit to the UN General Assembly in 1966 with a recommendation that a conference be convened to conclude a convention based on the draft. The conference held its first meeting in 1968, and the convention was adopted at its second session the following year.
The convention applies only to written treaties between states. The first part of the document defines the terms and scope of the agreement. The second part lays out the rules for the conclusion and adoption of treaties, including the consent of parties to be bound by treaties and the formulation of reservations—that is, declining to be bound by one or more particular provisions of a treaty while accepting the rest. The third part deals with the application and interpretation of treaties, and the fourth part discusses means of modifying or amending treaties. These parts essentially codify existing customary law. The most important part of the convention, Part V, delineates grounds and rules for invalidating, terminating, or suspending treaties and includes a provision granting the International Court of Justice jurisdiction in the event of disputes arising from the application of those rules. The final parts discuss the effects on treaties of changes of government within a state, alterations in consular relations between states, and the outbreak of hostilities between states as well as the rules for depositaries, registration, and ratification.
It was necessary for 35 member states of the United Nations to ratify the treaty before it could go into effect. Although it took until 1979 to secure those ratifications, more than half of the UN members had agreed to the convention by early 2018. Even those members that had not ratified the document, such as the United States, generally followed the prescriptions of the agreement.
