War Resisters’ International (WRI),  an international secular pacifist organization with headquarters in London and more than 80 associates in 40 countries. War Resisters’ International (WRI) was founded in 1921. As an antimilitarist organization, it adopted a declaration in its founding year that has not changed:
With roots in the socialist antimilitaristic resistance to World War I, the founders saw the need for a global movement to oppose all forms of wars. WRI has been central in coordinating support for conscientious objections in countries with compulsory military service. The individual acts of resistance were turned into a political movement through international solidarity.
During World War II many members of WRI were active in the nonviolent resistance and hid wanted persons from persecution. During the first wave of antinuclear campaigning in the 1960s, members of WRI were active in preparation and implementation of civil disobedience and other forms of resistance. The U.S. section, War Resisters League, played an important role in the opposition to the Vietnam War and actively took part in that country’s civil rights movement.
WRI explored the possibilities for more active interventions in war zones. In 1968 it organized demonstrations in Warsaw Pact capitals to protest the invasion of Czechoslovakia. Operation Omega was aimed to support Bangladesh with emergency aid under the Pakistani blockade in 1971. During the wars in the Balkans at the end of the 20th century, WRI and its associates took part in several interventions, among them Balkan Peace Team, which supported local activists in Croatia, Serbia, and Kosovo.
In the early 21st century WRI has sought to dismantle the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and support conscientious objectors in Turkey and Colombia, among other efforts. In addition to continuing its traditional work with conscientious objectors and deserters, the organization has also taken on work on women and war, social defense, nonviolent social empowerment, and nonviolence in a broad sense.
