World Organisation for Animal Health, formerly Office International des Epizooties,  intergovernmental organization established to gather and disseminate information about animal diseases around the world and to create health standards to protect international trade in animals and their products. It was founded in 1924 as the Office International des Epizooties (OIE). The organization adopted its English-language name in 2003, but it retained the well-recognized abbreviation of its original name. Its headquarters are in Paris.
The OIE’s highest governing body is the World Assembly of Delegates, which meets at least once a year; each member country has one vote on its resolutions. Its other organizing body is the nine-member Council, which meets twice annually to handle administrative functions and prepare for the meetings of the World Assembly of Delegates. The OIE is headed by a director-general, who is elected by the World Assembly of Delegates to a five-year term and can serve multiple terms. In the early 21st century the organization had more than 170 member countries.
The formation of the OIE was inspired by an outbreak of the highly contagious animal disease rinderpest in Belgium in 1920 that had been transmitted by cattle en route from India to Brazil via Antwerp. It gave rise to concerns in Europe regarding communicable diseases among livestock. In 1921 a conference on the subject was held in Paris, attended by representatives of 42 countries. The conference’s recommendations included the creation of an international office to aid in the control of infectious diseases, an endeavour that gained the support of the League of Nations. On January 25, 1924, a group of 28 signatories—mainly European countries but also Mexico, several countries of South America, Egypt, Tunisia, and Siam (later Thailand)—ratified an agreement to create the OIE. The OIE held its first conference four years later in Geneva.
The organization has a range of missions: assuring the transparency of its workings, building international solidarity, promoting veterinary services, disseminating scientific information, monitoring food safety and animal welfare, and maintaining sanitary safety in the international trade in animals and animal products. Over the years it has formed a large number of official collaborations with other international organizations, such as the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization (which recognizes the OIE as a reference organization—one consulted in an official capacity as to best practices), as well as a number of regional public and animal health alliances. Its member countries report to the OIE, which collects information on animal diseases around the world and maintains the World Animal Health Information System, a database of animal health conditions available to OIE delegates, and the World Animal Health Information Database, which is accessible to the public.
