Animal disease,  an impairment of the normal state of an animal that interrupts or modifies its vital functions.
Concern with diseases that afflict animals dates from the earliest human contacts with animals and is reflected in early views of religion and magic. Diseases of animals remain a concern principally because of the economic losses they cause and the possible transmission of the causative agents to humans. The branch of medicine called veterinary medicine deals with the study, prevention, and treatment of diseases not only in domesticated animals but also in wild animals and in animals used in scientific research. The prevention, control, and eradication of diseases of economically important animals are agricultural concerns. Programs for the control of diseases communicable from animals to man, called zoonoses, especially those in pets and in wildlife, are closely related to human health. Further, the diseases of animals are of increasing importance, for a primary public-health problem throughout the world is animal-protein deficiency in the diet of humans. Indeed, both the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have been attempting to solve the problem of protein deficits in a world whose human population is rapidly expanding.
Historical evidence, like that from currently developing nations, indicates that veterinary medicine originally developed in response to the needs of pastoral and agricultural man along with human medicine. It seems likely that a veterinary profession existed throughout a large area of Africa and Asia from at least 2000 bce. Ancient Egyptian literature includes monographs on both animal and human diseases. Evidence of the parallel development of human and veterinary medicine is found in the writings of Hippocrates on medicine and of Aristotle, who described the symptomatology and therapy of the diseases of animals, including man. Early Greek scholars, noting the similarities of medical problems among the many animal species, taught both human and veterinary medicine. In the late 4th century bce, Alexander the Great designed programs involving the study of animals, and medical writings of the Romans show that some of the most important early observations on the natural history of disease were made by men who wrote chiefly about agriculture, particularly the aspect involving domesticated animals.
Most of the earliest suggestions of relationships between human health and animal diseases were part of folklore, magic, or religious practice. The Hindu’s concern for the well-being of animals, for example, originated in his belief in reincarnation. From the pre-Christian Era to about 1500, the distinctions between the practices of human and veterinary medicine were not clear-cut; this was especially true in the fields of obstetrics and orthopedics, in which animal doctors in rural areas often delivered babies and set human-bone fractures. It was realized, however, that training in one field was inadequate for practicing in the other, and the two fields were separated.
Veterinary literature from the civilizations of Greece and Rome contains reference to “herd factors” in disease; contagion within groups of animals kept together, therefore, was recognized, and both quarantine and slaughter were used to control outbreaks of livestock diseases. Rinderpest (cattle plague) was the most important livestock disease from the 5th century until control methods were developed. Serious outbreaks of the disease prompted the founding of the first veterinary college (École Nationale Vétérinaire), in Lyon, France, in 1762. Many aspects of animal diseases are best understood in terms of population or herd phenomena; for example, herds of livestock, rather than individual animals, are vaccinated against specific diseases, and housing, nutrition, and breeding practices are related to the likelihood of illness in the herd.
The work of Pasteur was of fundamental significance to general medicine and to agriculture. Veterinarians became concerned with foods of animal origin after the discovery of microorganisms and their identification with diseases in man and other animals. Efforts were directed toward protecting humans from diseases of animal origin, primarily those transmitted through meat or dairy products. Modern principles of food hygiene, first established for the dairy and meat-packing industries in the 19th and early 20th centuries, have been generally applied to other food-related industries. The veterinary profession, especially in Europe, assumed a major role in early food-hygiene programs.
Since World War II, the eradication of animal diseases, rather than their control, has become increasingly important, and conducting basic research, combatting zoonoses, and contributing to man’s food supply have become indispensable services of veterinary medicine.
About 50 percent of the world’s population suffers from chronic malnutrition and hunger. Inadequate diet claims many thousands of lives each day. When the lack of adequate food to meet present needs for an estimated world population of more than 4,600,000,000 in the 1980s is coupled with the prediction that the population may increase to 7,000,000,000 by the year 2000, it becomes obvious that animal-food supplies must be increased. One way in which this might be accomplished is by learning to control the diseases that afflict animals throughout the world, especially in the developing nations of Asia and Africa, where the population is expanding most rapidly. Most of the information concerning animal diseases, however, applies to domesticated animals such as pigs, cattle, and sheep, which are relatively unimportant as food sources in these nations. Remarkably little is known of the diseases of the goat, the water buffalo, the camel, the elephant, the yak, the llama, or the alpaca; all are domesticated animals upon which the economies of many developing countries depend. It is in these countries that increased animal production resulting from the development of methods for the control and eradication of diseases affecting these animals is most urgently needed.
Despite the development of various effective methods of disease control, substantial quantities of meat and milk are lost each year throughout the world. In countries in which animal-disease control is not yet adequately developed, the loss of animal protein from disease is about 30 to 40 percent of the quantity available in certain underdeveloped areas. In addition, such countries also suffer losses resulting from poor husbandry practices.
Animals have long been recognized as agents of human disease. Man has probably been bitten, stung, kicked, and gored by animals for as long as he has been on earth; in addition, early man sometimes became ill or died after eating the flesh of dead animals. In more recent times, man has discovered that many invertebrate animals are capable of transmitting causative agents of disease from man to man or from other vertebrates to man. Such animals, which act as hosts, agents, and carriers of disease, are important in causing and perpetuating human illness. Because about three-fourths of the important known zoonoses are associated with domesticated animals, including pets, the term zoonosis was originally defined as a group of diseases that man is able to acquire from domesticated animals. But this definition has been modified to include all human diseases (whether or not they manifest themselves in all hosts as apparent diseases) that are acquired from or transmitted to any other vertebrate animal. Thus, zoonoses are naturally occurring infections and infestations shared by man and other vertebrates.
Although the role of domesticated animals in many zoonoses is understood, the role of the numerous species of wild animals with which man is less intimately associated is not well understood. The discovery that diseases such as yellow fever, viral brain infections, plague, and numerous other important diseases involving man or his domesticated animals are fundamentally diseases of wildlife and exist independently of man and his civilization, however, has increased the significance of studying the nature of wildlife diseases.
Although in modern times the practice of veterinary medicine has been separated from that of human medicine, the observations of the physician and the veterinarian continue to add to the common body of medical knowledge. Of the more than 1,200,000 species of animals thus far identified, only a few have been utilized in research, even though it is likely that, for every known human disease, an identical or similar disease exists in at least one other animal species. Veterinary medicine plays an ever-increasing role in the health of man through the use of animals as biomedical models with similar disease counterparts in man. This use of animals as models is important because research on many genetic and chronic diseases of man cannot be carried out using humans.
Hundreds of thousands of mice and monkeys are utilized each year in research laboratories in the U.S. alone. Animal studies are used in the development of new surgical techniques (e.g., organ transplantations), in the testing of new drugs for safety, and in nutritional research. Animals are especially valuable in research involving chronic degenerative diseases, because such diseases can be induced in animals experimentally with relative ease. The importance of chronic degenerative diseases, such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases, has increased in parallel with the growing number of communicable diseases that have been brought under control.
Examples of animal diseases that are quite similar to commonly occurring human diseases include chronic emphysema in the horse; leukemia in cats and cattle; muscular dystrophies in chickens and mice; atherosclerosis in pigs and pigeons; blood-coagulation disorders and nephritis in dogs; gastric ulcers in swine; vascular aneurysms (permanent and abnormal blood-filled area of a blood vessel) in turkeys; diabetes mellitus in Chinese hamsters; milk allergy and gallstones in rabbits; hepatitis in dogs and horses; hydrocephalus (fluid in the head) and skin allergies in many species; epilepsy in dogs and gerbils; hereditary deafness in many small animals; cataracts in the eyes of dogs and mice; and urinary stones in dogs and cattle.
The study of animals with diseases similar to those that affect man has increased knowledge of the diseases in man; knowledge of nutrition, for example, based largely on the results of animal studies, has improved the health of animals, including man. Animal investigations have been used extensively in the treatment of shock, in open-heart surgery, in organ transplantations, and in the testing of new drugs. Other important contributions to human health undoubtedly will result from new research discoveries involving the study of animal diseases.
Epidemiology, the study of epidemics, is sometimes defined as the medical aspect of ecology, for it is the study of diseases in animal populations. Hence the epidemiologist is concerned with the interactions of organisms and their environments as related to the presence of disease. The multiple-causality concept of disease embraced by epidemiology involves combinations of environmental factors and host factors, in addition to the determination of the specific causative agent of a given disease. Environmental factors include geographical features, climate, and concentration of certain elements in soil and water. Host factors include age, breed, sex, and the physiological state of an animal as well as the general immunity of a herd resulting from previous contact with a disease. Epidemiology, therefore, is concerned with the determination of the individual animals that are affected by a disease, the environmental circumstances under which it may occur, the causative agents, and the ways in which transmission occurs in nature. The epidemiologist, who utilizes many scientific disciplines (e.g., medicine, zoology, mathematics, anthropology), attempts to determine the types of diseases that exist in a specific geographical area and to control them by modifying the environment.
Diseases in animal populations are characterized by certain features. Some outbreaks are termed sporadic diseases because they appear only occasionally in individuals within an animal population. Diseases normally present in an area are referred to as endemic, or enzootic, diseases, and they usually reflect a relatively stable relationship between the causative agent and the animals affected by it. Diseases that occasionally occur at higher than normal rates in animal populations are referred to as epidemic, or epizootic, diseases, and they generally represent an unstable relationship between the causative agent and affected animals.
The effect of diseases on a stable ecological system, which is the result of the dominance of some plants and animals and the subordination or extinction of others, depends on the degree to which the causative agents of diseases and their hosts are part of the system. Epidemic diseases result from an ecological imbalance; endemic diseases often represent a balanced state. Ecological imbalance and, hence, epidemic disease may be either naturally caused or induced by man. A breakdown in sanitation in a city, for example, offers conditions favourable for an increase in the rodent population, with the possibility that diseases such as plague may be introduced into and spread among the human population. In this case, an epidemic would result as much from an alteration in the environment as from the presence of the causative agent Pasteurella pestis, since, in relatively balanced ecological systems, the causative agent exists enzootically in the rodents (i.e., they serve as reservoirs for the disease) and seldom involves man. In a similar manner, an increase in the number of epidemics of viral encephalitis, a brain disease, in man has resulted from the ecological imbalance of mosquitoes and wild birds caused by man’s exploitation of lowland for farming. Driven from their natural habitat of reeds and rushes, the wild birds, important natural hosts for the virus that causes the disease, are forced to feed near farms; mosquitoes transmit the virus from birds to cattle and man.
