Balfour Biological Laboratory, in full Balfour Biological Laboratory for Women,  institution for women’s biological instruction (1884–1914) at the University of Cambridge, England. The facility—one of the first in Britain tailored specifically to women’s formal laboratory instruction—was established to assist the students of Cambridge’s Newnham and Girton women’s colleges in their preparation for the university’s Natural Sciences Tripos, which was opened to women in 1881 (along with all other tripos examinations at the university).
In the 1860s and ’70s women seeking higher education in the natural sciences attended lectures at the men’s colleges at Cambridge. At that time Cambridge physiologist Michael Foster became known for his revolutionary teaching methods, in which lectures were followed by laboratory training, and his colleague zoologist and embryologist Francis Maitland Balfour offered courses in animal morphology and embryology that also incorporated laboratory demonstration. When enrollment in Foster’s and Balfour’s classes swelled, officials at Newnham and Girton proposed the establishment of a separate women’s laboratory training facility. Both men, who served as advisers for the women’s colleges, supported the decision.
Proposals for the laboratory were put forth by Emily Davies at Girton, who suggested that the facility be established and managed by the university, and by Newnham’s Eleanor Sidgwick, who favoured control by a joint committee of the two colleges. Sidgwick—who was Balfour’s sister and whose husband, philosopher and author Henry Sidgwick, had played an instrumental role in Newnham’s founding—spearheaded fund-raising efforts and eventually raised enough money to acquire an abandoned chapel at Downing Place on the Cambridge campus. Although funds were limited, with the generosity and support of donors and volunteers, the building was outfitted with worktables, water and gas lines, and a variety of instruments, including microscopes, a spectroscope, and a microtome (a device used for cutting thin slices of cells for microscope slide preparation). In 1884, when the facility opened to Newnham and Girton students, it was dedicated to Balfour, who had died two years earlier during an attempted ascent of Mont Blanc.
The laboratory’s first director was Alice Johnson, a former student of animal morphology under Balfour. Former Newnham and Girton students who had performed well in the Natural Sciences Tripos were appointed as demonstrators, providing practical instruction that supported the university lectures attended by their students. The classes offered at Balfour initially included botany, comparative anatomy, physiology, and zoology; classes in physics, morphology, and geology were added later.
Because women were not permitted to join Cambridge’s science clubs and societies, Balfour students developed their own clubs and discussion groups. At those gatherings the women shared their ideas and talked about science without fear of ridicule by their male counterparts. That network of intellectual support at Balfour was especially important in the late 1890s, when the place of women in Cambridge’s science lectures was challenged by zoologist Adam Sedgwick, who in 1897 appears to have banned women from his morphology classes.
Despite the views of individuals such as Sedgwick, there were several male instructors at Cambridge who supported women’s higher education and who played key roles in the careers of Balfour’s graduates. For example, in the laboratory of Cambridge biologist William Bateson, Balfour graduates Edith Rebecca Saunders and Muriel Wheldale (later Muriel Wheldale Onslow) contributed to the foundation of modern genetics. Botanist Agnes Robertson (later Agnes Arber), known for her research on the comparative anatomy of plants, which she performed at Balfour, studied with Cambridge paleobotanist Edward Alexander Newell Arber (whom she later married).
In the early 1900s, sympathy toward women’s education in the sciences increased, resulting in greater enrollment of women at Cambridge. Even Sedgwick ultimately relented and again permitted women to attend his classes. By 1914, however, enrollment had decreased dramatically at Balfour, in part because of the increased acceptance of women in the university’s classes, as well as because of the onset of World War I, and the laboratory closed. During and after the war, both men and women made use of the building’s laboratory space. In the 1930s, however, the structure was converted into a parish hall for a neighbouring church.
