behaviour genetics, also called psychogenetics,  the study of the influence of an organism’s genetic composition on its behaviour and the interaction of heredity and environment insofar as they affect behaviour. The question of the determinants of behavioral abilities and disabilities has commonly been referred to as the “nature-nurture” controversy.
The relationship between behaviour and genetics, or heredity, dates to the work of English scientist Sir Francis Galton (1822–1911), who coined the phrase “nature and nurture.” Galton studied the families of outstanding men of his day and concluded, like his cousin Charles Darwin, that mental powers run in families. Galton became the first to use twins in genetic research and pioneered many of the statistical methods of analysis that are in use today. In 1918 British statistician and geneticist Ronald Aylmer Fisher published a paper that showed how Gregor Mendel’s laws of inheritance applied to complex traits influenced by multiple genes and environmental factors.
The first human behavioral genetic research on intelligence and mental illness began in the 1920s, when environmentalism (the theory that behaviour is a result of nongenetic factors such as various childhood experiences) became popular and before Nazi Germany’s abuse of genetics made the notion of hereditary influence abhorrent. Although genetic research on human behaviour continued throughout the following decades, it was not until the 1970s that a balanced view came to prevail in psychiatry that recognized the importance of nature as well as nurture. In psychology, this reconciliation did not take hold until the 1980s. Much behavioral genetic research today focuses on identifying specific genes that affect behavioral dimensions, such as personality and intelligence, and disorders, such as autism, hyperactivity, depression, and schizophrenia.
Quantitative genetic methods are used to estimate the net effect of genetic and environmental factors on individual differences in any complex trait, including behavioral traits. In addition, molecular genetic methods are used to identify specific genes responsible for genetic influence. Research is carried out in both animals and humans; however, studies using animal models tend to provide more-accurate data than studies in humans because both genes and environment can be manipulated and controlled in the laboratory.
By mating related animals such as siblings for many generations, nearly pure strains are obtained in which all offspring are genetically highly similar. It is possible to screen for genetic influence on behaviour by comparing the behaviour of different inbred strains raised in the same laboratory environment. Another method, known as selective breeding, evaluates genetic involvement by attempting to breed for high and low extremes of a trait for several generations. Both methods have been applied to a wide variety of animal behaviours, especially learning and behavioral responses to drugs, and this research provides evidence for widespread influence of genes on behaviour.
Because genes and environments cannot be manipulated in the human species, two quasi-experimental methods are used to screen for genetic influence on individual differences in complex traits such as behaviour. The twin method relies on the accident of nature that results in identical (monozygotic, MZ) twins or fraternal (dizygotic, DZ) twins. MZ twins are like clones, genetically identical to each other because they came from the same fertilized egg. DZ twins, on the other hand, developed from two eggs that happened to be fertilized at the same time. Like other siblings, DZ twins are only half as similar genetically as MZ twins. To the extent that behavioral variability is caused by environmental factors, DZ twins should be as similar for the behavioral trait as are MZ twins because both types of twins are reared by the same parents in the same place at the same time. If the trait is influenced by genes, then DZ twins ought to be less similar than MZ twins. For schizophrenia, for example, the concordance (risk of one twin’s being schizophrenic if the other is) is about 45 percent for MZ twins and about 15 percent for DZ twins. For intelligence as assessed by IQ tests, the correlation, an index of resemblance (0.00 indicates no resemblance and 1.00 indicates perfect resemblance), is 0.85 for MZ twins and 0.60 for DZ twins for studies throughout the world of more than 10,000 pairs of twins. The twin method has been robustly defended as a rough screen for genetic influence on behaviour.
The adoption method is a quasi-experimental design that relies on a social accident in which children are adopted away from their biological (birth) parents early in life, thus cleaving the effects of nature and nurture. Because the twin and adoption methods are so different, greater confidence is warranted when results from these two methods converge on the same conclusion—as they usually do. An influential adoption study of schizophrenia in 1966 by American behavioral geneticist Leonard Heston showed that children adopted away from their schizophrenic biological mothers at birth were just as likely to become schizophrenic (about 10 percent) as were children reared by their schizophrenic biological mothers. A 20-year study begun in the 1970s in the United States of intelligence of adopted children and their biological and adoptive parents showed increasing similarity from infancy to childhood to adolescence between the adopted children and their biological parents but no resemblance between the adopted children and their adoptive parents.
In contrast to traditional molecular genetic research that focused on rare disorders caused by a single genetic mutation, molecular genetic research on complex behavioral traits and common behavioral disorders is much more difficult because multiple genes are involved and each gene has a relatively small effect. However, some genes identified in animal models have contributed to an improved understanding of complex human behavioral disorders such as reading disability, hyperactivity, autism, and dementia.
