Bioluminescence,  emission of light by an organism or by a laboratory biochemical system derived from an organism. It could be the ghostly glow of bacteria on decaying meat or fish, the shimmering radiance of protozoans in tropical seas, or the flickering signals of fireflies. The phenomenon occurs sporadically in a wide range of protists and animals, from bacteria and fungi to insects, marine invertebrates, and fish, but it is not known to exist naturally in true plants or in amphibians, reptiles, birds, or mammals. Bioluminescence results from a chemical reaction (chemiluminescence) in which the conversion of chemical energy to radiant energy is direct and virtually 100 percent efficient; i.e., very little heat is given off in the process. For that reason, the emission is called cold light or luminescence.
Light production appears to be associated with the protection and survival of a species. That is quite clear in certain squids, who secrete a luminous cloud to confuse an enemy and make an escape, and in many deep-sea fishes who dangle luminous lures to attract prey or who show light organs to disguise their form from enemies, frighten predators, or simply light the way in the darkness of the ocean deeps. The survival value of bioluminescence is indisputable for many organisms who use their flashes as species-recognition and mating signals.
In Photinus pyralis, a common North American firefly, the male flashes spontaneously while in flight, emitting on average a 0.3-second flash every 5.5 seconds if the temperature is 25 °C (77 °F). The females watch from the ground and wait for a male to flash. Upon seeing a flash, a female flashes a response after an interval of about 2 seconds. It is that response that attracts the male. The female is unable to identify a male by his flashing. Thus, it is the male that recognizes the correct signal—i.e., interval between flashes—and seeks out the female. The interval between the male’s signal and the female’s response, therefore, is crucial. Similar specific recognition codes are used by many species of fireflies. Other fireflies possibly rely on colour differences in the light signals between sexes.
Lantern fishes and hatchetfishes, along with many other deep-sea organisms, possess distinct arrangements of light organs on the body that may serve as species- and sex-recognition patterns. The light organs, or photophores, of many deep-sea fishes are placed on the ventral and lateral surfaces of the body, and the light is emitted downward and outward. Such an arrangement is believed to allow the light of the photophores to be used to match the intensity of sunlight penetrating from above, thus concealing the fish’s own shadow from a predator below. Some lantern fishes possess, in addition, a large nasal organ; others have a patch of luminous tissue in the tail region. In deep-sea anglerfishes, the first dorsal spine is turned forward into an elongated rod, from the end of which dangles a luminous organ. When an unsuspecting prey approaches the luminous lure, it is engulfed in the fish’s large jaw.
The functional role of bioluminescence in lower organisms such as bacteria, dinoflagellates, and fungi is difficult to discern. Partly because the glow of luminous bacteria is extinguished when oxygen is removed, it has been suggested that the bioluminescent reaction was originally used to remove oxygen toxic to primitive types of bacteria that developed when oxygen was absent or very rare in Earth’s atmosphere. The metabolic reaction that combines the oxygen with a reducing substance (luciferin) liberates sufficient energy to excite a molecule in the organism to emit visible radiation. Most of those luminous primitive organisms subsequently developed systems of using oxygen, but they have retained the luminescent capability as parts of related metabolic pathways or for some survival value that luminescence may confer on the organism.
