Bird flu, also called avian influenza,  a viral respiratory disease mainly of poultry and certain other bird species, including migratory waterbirds, some imported pet birds, and ostriches, that can be transmitted directly to humans. The first known cases in humans were reported in 1997, when an outbreak of avian influenza A virus subtype H5N1 in poultry in Hong Kong led to severe illness in 18 people, one-third of whom died.
Between 2003 and late 2005, outbreaks of subtype H5N1, the most deadly variety of bird flu, occurred among poultry in Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Laos, Malaysia, Romania, Russia, South Korea, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam. Hundreds of millions of birds in those countries died from the disease or were killed in attempts to control the epidemics. Similar culling events have taken place since then, including culls in countries in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
According to the World Health Organization, more than 850 people were infected with H5N1 between 2003 and 2016; more than 50 percent of those individuals died. The majority of human H5N1 infections and deaths occurred in Egypt, Indonesia, and Vietnam.
Small outbreaks of bird flu caused by other subtypes of the virus have also occurred. A less severe form of disease associated with H7N7, for example, was reported in the Netherlands in 2003, where it caused one human death but led to the culling of thousands of chickens; since then the virus has been detected in the country on several occasions. In 2013 a strain of H7N9 capable of causing severe pneumonia and death emerged in China, with the first confirmed cases detected in February that year and dozens more reported in the following months. It was the first H7N9 outbreak reported in humans.
Symptoms of bird flu in humans resemble those of the human variety of influenza and include fever, sore throat, cough, headache, and muscle aches, which appear following an incubation period of several days. Severe infection can result in conjunctivitis or such life-threatening complications as bacterial or viral pneumonia and acute respiratory illness.
Bird flu in avian species occurs in two forms, one mild and the other highly virulent and contagious; the latter form is called fowl plague. Mutation of the virus causing the mild form is thought to have given rise to the virus causing the severe form. The infectious agents of bird flu are any of several subtypes of type A influenza virus, which is classified as an orthomyxovirus. Other subtypes of this virus are responsible for most cases of human influenza and for the great influenza pandemics of the past (see influenza pandemic of 1918–19 and influenza pandemic (H1N1) of 2009). Genetic analysis suggests that the influenza A subtypes that afflict mainly nonavian animals, including humans, pigs, whales, and horses, derive at least partially from bird flu subtypes.
All the subtypes are distinguished on the basis of variations in two proteins found on the surface of the viral particle—hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N). H5N1, the cause of the 1997 bird flu outbreak in Hong Kong, was first identified in terns in South Africa in 1961. It has been responsible for the vast majority of laboratory-confirmed bird flu infections in humans and for the most devastating outbreaks in poultry. Eight other H5 subtypes have been discovered as well as nine H7 subtypes and nine H9 subtypes. Several H10 and H6 viruses have also been found in birds and in humans. A subtype known as H7N9 was first isolated from birds and humans in 2013, having caused severe illness in most infected persons.
Avian influenza viruses are further distinguished as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) or low pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI). With few exceptions (e.g., H5N1, H7N9), most H5, H7, and H9 subtypes are LPAI viruses. LPAI viruses can still cause mild to moderate disease, however. For example, infection with H7N2, H7N3, H7N7, or H9N2 can produce mild to moderate symptoms of illness in birds and humans.
To better understand the pandemic potential of H5N1, scientists have genetically altered H5N1 to make it transmissible between ferrets, which respond to influenza in much the same way that humans do. The possibility for its transmission to humans, however, raised concern about its potential use as a biological weapon.
Waterfowl such as wild ducks are thought to be primary hosts for all bird flu subtypes. Though normally resistant to the viruses, the birds carry them in their intestines and distribute them through feces into the environment, where they infect susceptible domestic birds. Sick birds pass the viruses to healthy birds through saliva, nasal secretions, and feces. Within a single region, bird flu is transmitted readily from farm to farm by airborne feces-contaminated dust and soil, by contaminated clothing, feed, and equipment, or by wild animals carrying the virus on their bodies. The disease is spread from region to region by migratory birds and through international trade in live poultry. Humans who are in close contact with sick birds—for example, poultry farmers and slaughterhouse workers—are at the greatest risk of becoming infected. Virus-contaminated surfaces and intermediate hosts such as pigs can also be sources of infection for humans.
Although isolated instances of person-to-person transmission appear to have occurred since 1997, sustained transmission has not been observed. However, through a rapid evolutionary process called antigenic shift, two viral subtypes—e.g., one a bird flu virus such as H5N1 and the other a human influenza virus—can combine parts of their genetic makeup to produce a previously unknown viral subtype. If the new subtype causes severe disease in humans, spreads easily between people, and has a combination of surface proteins to which few people have immunity, the stage will be set for a new influenza pandemic to occur.
