Bloodborne disease,  any of a group of diseases caused by pathogens such as viruses or bacteria that are carried in and spread through contact with blood. Common bloodborne diseases include hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as Ebola virus disease and Lassa fever, are other examples.
Infection with bloodborne pathogens occurs through direct contact with contaminated blood or blood products. Specific routes of infection include contact with blood through needles or other sharp objects, blood transfusions with blood that has not been screened for the presence of infectious agents, and transmission from mother to child during pregnancy or at birth. Some bloodborne pathogens can also be transmitted through contact with other bodily fluids, such as amniotic fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, semen, and vaginal secretions.
Hepatitis B is caused by infection with the hepatitis B virus (HBV). Although some persons do not experience symptoms, others suffer jaundice, fatigue, abdominal pain, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and joint pain. Infection may become chronic, particularly in individuals who become infected in infancy; chronic infection can lead to cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) and liver cancer later in life. Hepatitis B can be prevented through vaccination.
Hepatitis C is caused by infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV). Persons at highest risk include injection drug users and persons who undergo blood transfusions with unscreened blood or blood products. Most individuals infected with HCV are asymptomatic. However, chronic hepatitis C infection can result in severe liver damage and liver cancer. Although there is no vaccine for hepatitis C, liver function and immune activity against the virus can be improved with drug treatments.
HIV, the cause of AIDS, is transmitted primarily through blood. Possible routes of infection include unprotected sexual activity, the use of unsterilized needles, and transfusion of contaminated blood. In the advanced stages of HIV/AIDS, immune system failure opens the way for opportunistic infections and unusual cancers, particularly Kaposi sarcoma. There is no vaccine for AIDS, though medical treatments are available.
Viral hemorrhagic fevers are caused by bloodborne viruses that damage the vascular system, resulting in extensive external or internal hemorrhaging (bleeding). Most viral hemorrhagic fevers are zoonotic, being transmitted to humans by animals such as rodents and insects. Symptoms typically include fever, fatigue, dizziness, muscle aches, loss of strength, exhaustion, and bleeding under the skin, in internal organs, and from body orifices. There are no vaccines to protect against viral hemorrhagic fevers, and treatment primarily is supportive. Infection can be prevented by avoiding contact with host species and controlling rodent and insect populations. Viral hemorrhagic fevers can be spread from human to human through physical contact; hence, the isolation of infected individuals is another means of preventing infection.
Most exposures to bloodborne disease can be prevented through the use of barrier methods (e.g., condoms) during sexual intercourse, avoidance of injection drug use, and the use of screened blood for blood transfusions. Health-care workers generally also adhere to a special set of practices, or standard precautions, to minimize the risk of infection to themselves and patients. Standard precautions to help prevent the transmission of bloodborne disease include the use of personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves, protective eyewear, and face masks), consistent hand hygiene, and the sterilization and proper disposal of needles and other sharp objects. Immunization against hepatitis B and postexposure management, such as the provision of prophylactic medication, are also recommended for health workers and others at high risk of infection.
