Breech birth,  in childbirth, position of the fetus in which the buttocks or feet are presented first. About 3 to 4 percent of babies are in a breech presentation at the onset of labour. In nearly all other cases, babies born vaginally are born headfirst, since they are in a head-down position in the mother’s uterus.
Many babies are breech early in pregnancy, but most of them turn to the headfirst position near the end of the pregnancy. Babies who are born early are more likely to be breech. In the case of twins or triplets, the likelihood of a breech baby is increased. Abnormal levels of amniotic fluid around the baby may also result in a breech birth. As the due date approaches, a physician can determine if the fetus is breech by performing a physical exam, an ultrasound, or both.
There are many complications associated with a breech birth delivered vaginally, and, therefore, physicians typically suggest cesarean delivery (also known as a C-section). The risks involved with cesarean delivery include bleeding, infection, and a longer hospital stay for both the mother and her baby.
A baby who is breech may be very small or may have birth defects. Because the head is delivered last, breech babies are also susceptible to umbilical cord compression and asphyxiation. When the umbilical cord becomes compressed, there is diminished oxygen flow to the baby. In this situation the baby must be delivered immediately (usually by C-section) so that he or she can breathe. If there is a delay in delivery and oxygen deprivation is prolonged, the brain can be damaged, leaving the baby with permanent neurological damage or even causing death. In some cases, a breech birth may even cause the death of the mother or both mother and baby.
Some doctors give their patients exercises to do at home that may help turn the baby to the headfirst position. For women who prefer a normal vaginal delivery, the physician may use the external cephalic version to try to turn the baby from breech to vertex (head-down) position in the uterus. The physician will use his or her hands on the outside of the expecting mother’s abdomen to try to orient the baby so that the head is first to exit the vagina. External cephalic version is performed at the end of pregnancy, after about 37 weeks of gestation. The average success rate is about 65 percent. Even if the procedure works at first, there is still a chance that the baby will turn back around to the breech position.
