Callophyllis,  genus of about 60 species of red algae, the largest group in the family Kallymeniaceae, widely distributed in the world’s oceans and known for their brilliant red to purple colour. Carola (Callophyllis variegata), harvested off the southern coast of Chile, is a popular edible seaweed.
Callophyllis generally occur in subtidal or intertidal areas, where they are anchored to rocky substrates (or occasionally to other algae) by a discoid holdfast. The thallus, typically made up of flat, sometimes deeply and irregularly divided branches and glossy or semi-glossy blades (leaflike structures), extends upward from the holdfast, sometimes supported on a short stipe (stemlike stalk). The blades, which lack midribs and veins, have large cells in the medulla (central region) and ragged or smooth margins. Many Callophyllis have flexible fleshy branches and blades, though some (particularly intertidal specimens) may be brittle. Most species grow to between about 5 and 30 cm (2 and 12 inches) in height, though some are slightly smaller or larger. Their vivid coloration is attributed to the pigments allophycocyanin (red), phycoerythrin (red), and phycocyanin (blue), which are common to red algae.
Callophyllis are dioecious (individuals being male or female) and reproduce primarily by sexual means through the production of various spore types. Under amenable conditions, an individual Callophyllis will produce tetraspores, a set of four cells that form haploid gametophytes (sex cells containing a single set of chromosomes). Gametophyte formation prompts the growth of spermatangial branches that contain spermatia (male gametes) or carpogonial branches with carpogonia (female gametes). Spermatia are released into the water and rely on currents to bring them into contact with carpogonial branches. The union of spermatia and carpogonia leads to the production of structures known as gonimoblast filaments, which are involved in the production of diploid carpospores (nonsex, or vegetative, cells having two sets of chromosomes). Once released, carpospores settle to the ocean floor. On a suitable substrate, the spores may germinate and give rise to a new Callophyllis. This so-called tetrasporophyte generation can later divide through meiosis (reductive cell division) to form new tetraspores.
