caterpillar,  larva of a butterfly or moth (Lepidoptera). Most caterpillars have cylindrical bodies consisting of multiple segments, with three pairs of true legs on the thorax and several pairs of short, fleshy prolegs on the abdomen. The head has six small eyes (stemmata) on each side that function in light detection but not in image formation. They have short segmented antennae and strong jaws. Many caterpillars within the order Lepidoptera are called worms, such as the measuring worm, silkworm, and armyworm.
Caterpillars are known for their voracious appetites. They generally eat leaves of various types of plants, though some species eat insects or other small animals. Leaf-eating species can cause extensive damage to fruit trees, crops, ornamental plants, hardwood trees, and shrubs. For example, caterpillars of the cabbage looper moth (Trichoplusia ni) can consume three times their body weight in leaf matter daily. In addition to the damage these caterpillars cause by eating the leaves of cabbages and allied crops, the fecal matter they produce, known as frass, can stain leaves and render the plants unsaleable. Examples of insect-eating caterpillars include those of harvester butterflies (Feniseca tarquinius), which prey on woolly aphids, and the butterfly Alesa amesis, which feeds on the nymphs of insects in the order Homoptera. The snail-eating Hyposmocoma molluscivora is the only lepidopteran known to feed on a type of gastropod.
Some caterpillars possess specialized underwater respiratory structures that enable them to survive in aquatic habitats. For example, the larvae of some pyralid moths (family Pyralidae) are aquatic, and several members of the genus Hyposmocoma (family Cosmopterigidae) have an amphibious caterpillar stage. Some caterpillars spin silk cases, which provide protective shelters. These cases often have leaves, pebbles, and other matter woven into them, thereby making the caterpillars appear as part of their natural surroundings. Some examples of case-making caterpillars include larvae of the Asian hydrilla moth (Parapoynx diminutalis) and larvae of Hyposmocoma.
The appearance of caterpillars is highly variable, particularly concerning their coloration, which plays a fundamental role in their ability to protect themselves from predators. In many instances, a caterpillar’s appearance is meant to imitate that of its surroundings, and it changes as the larva grows. For example, young larvae of many swallowtail butterflies (Papilio) are white and brown and resemble bird droppings on leaves, but, as the caterpillars grow, their appearance changes such that their colours eventually serve as camouflage enabling them to blend in with the leaves and stems of plants. In some caterpillars, coloration is conspicuous or is augmented by the presence of features such as false eyespots, which may serve to deceive or frighten predators.
Other defense strategies used by caterpillars include the release of foul-smelling chemicals, the production of noises such as chirps, the generation of vibratory signals, and the sequestration in tissues of chemicals toxic to predators. Caterpillars of the giant peacock moth (Saturnia pyri) send out ultrasonic warning chirps to deter predators. In some cases, those chirps occur just prior to or in conjunction with the release of pungent chemical deterrents. The masked birch caterpillar (Drepana arcuata) produces vibratory signals in order to defend its territory against intruders of the same species; it produces the vibrations by drumming its mandibles on the leaf surface and by scratching its legs, which are covered by hairlike structures, against the leaf. Larvae of monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus) rely on a system of defense associated with their unique ability to feed on milkweed plants (Asclepias). These plants produce compounds known as cardenolides, which are normally toxic to animals. Monarch larvae, however, are unaffected by the poison, and they are able to sequester the compound in their tissues. Because the poison stays with the insects as they mature through subsequent stages of development, they are toxic to vertebrate predators both as larvae and as adult butterflies.
Caterpillar-like, or eruciform, larvae also occur in other insect groups, namely the scorpionflies (Mecoptera) and the sawflies (Hymenoptera). These can be distinguished in that most Lepidoptera caterpillars have prolegs on segments 3 through 6 and 10 of the abdomen, although this number may be reduced. In Mecoptera, prolegs are present on segments 1 to 8, and segment 10 has either a pair of hooks or a suction disk. Sawfly larvae have prolegs on all abdominal segments.
