Chestnut blight,  plant disease caused by the fungus Cryphonectria parasitica (formerly known as Endothia parasitica). Accidentally imported from Asia, the disease was first observed in 1904 in the New York Zoological Gardens. By 1925 it had decimated the American chestnut (Castanea dentata) population in an area extending over 1,600 km (1,000 miles) north, south, and west of its entry point. Since then the disease has killed virtually all the native American chestnuts in the United States and Canada. An estimated four billion trees have succumbed to the disease, significantly altering forest structures and having severe economic impacts on the nut and lumber industries. Chestnut blight is also destructive in other countries and to certain other tree species.
Symptoms include reddish brown bark patches that develop into sunken or swollen and cracked cankers that kill twigs and limbs. Leaves on such branches turn brown and wither but remain attached for months. Gradually the entire tree dies. The fungus persists for years in short-lived sprouts from old chestnut roots and in less susceptible hosts. It is spread locally by splashing rain, wind, and insects; over long distances, by birds. Other blight-susceptible species include Spanish chestnut (C. sativa), post oak (Quercus stellata), and live oak (Q. virginiana). In Europe and Asia several oak species are affected.
Chemical control of chestnut blight is impractical for forest settings. Chinese (C. mollissima) and Japanese (C. crenata) chestnuts are resistant. Crosses between American and Asian species have produced varieties with excellent nuts, but timber quality is closely linked with blight susceptibility. In the 1970s a native strain of chestnut blight was identified in North America. Experiments indicated that the native strain was less virulent than other strains and that it had a nullifying effect on lethal strains. Although the mild strain of blight does not readily spread from tree to tree among American chestnuts, trees can be manually inoculated with it. Experimental restoration efforts have utilized the hypovirulent strain to protect native chestnuts and have involved the planting of hybrid chestnut varieties with the aim of introducing genetic resistance into the gene pool.
