cotyledon,  seed leaf within the embryo of a seed. Cotyledons help supply the nutrition a plant embryo needs to germinate and become established as a photosynthetic organism and may themselves be a source of nutritional reserves or may aid the embryo in metabolizing nutrition stored elsewhere in the seed. Angiosperms (flowering plants) whose embryos have a single cotyledon are grouped as monocots, or monocotyledonous plants; most embryos with two cotyledons are grouped as eudicots, or eudicotyledonous plants. The number of cotyledons in the embryos of seeds of gymnosperms is highly variable, ranging from 8 to 20 or more.
Until it becomes nutritionally self-supporting, a seedling depends upon reserves provided by the parent. In angiosperms these reserves are found in the endosperm, in residual tissues of the ovule, or in the body of the embryo, usually in the cotyledons. Since reserve materials are partly in insoluble form—as starch grains, protein granules, lipid droplets, and the like—much of the early metabolism of the seedling is concerned with mobilizing these materials and delivering, or translocating, the products to active areas. In some seeds (e.g., castor beans), absorption of nutrients from reserves is through the cotyledons, which later expand in the light to become the first organs active in photosynthesis. In many monocots, the cotyledon acts as a special absorbing organ to mobilize the reserve materials and withdraw them from the endosperm; e.g., in grasses, the cotyledon has been modified into an enzyme-secreting scutellum (“shield”) between embryo and endosperm. When the reserves are stored in the cotyledons themselves, as is common in many eudicots, these organs may shrink after germination and die or develop chlorophyll and become photosynthetic. Whether cotyledons help absorb nutrients from the endosperm or store the nutrients themselves, these embryonic seed leaves do not usually persist long after germination.
Two patterns of seed germination occur in angiosperms, depending on whether the cotyledons emerge from the seed: hypogeal (belowground germination) and epigeal (aboveground germination). In hypogeous germination, the cotyledons do not emerge from the seed but rather force the radicle and epicotyl axis (which will produce the first true leaves) to elongate out of the seed coat. The seed, with the enclosed cotyledons, remains underground, and the epicotyl grows up through the soil. When the cotyledons contain seed nutritional reserves, these reserves are transferred directly to the developing radicle and epicotyl (e.g., garden pea). When the endosperm contains the reserves, the cotyledons penetrate the storage tissues and transfer the nutritional products to the developing radicle and epicotyl (e.g., garlic).
In epigeous germination, the radicle emerges from the seed and the hypocotyl (the embryonic stem) elongates, raising the cotyledons, epicotyl, and remains of the seed coat aboveground. The cotyledons may then expand and function photosynthetically as normal leaves (e.g., castor bean). When the cotyledons contain the seed nutritional reserves, they transfer them to the rest of the seedling and degenerate without becoming significantly photosynthetic (e.g., garden beans). Eventually the seedling becomes independent of the seed reserves and grows into a mature plant capable of reproduction.
