Ergot,  fungal disease of cereal grasses, especially rye, caused by species of the ascomycete fungus Claviceps. The disease decreases the production of viable grains by infected plants and can contaminate harvests. Ergot is commonly associated with rye infected by C. purpurea, but other economically important cereals are also susceptible to the disease by other fungal species. For example, ergot of sorghum is caused by C. africana, while that of pearl millet is due to C. fusiformis.
The wind carries the fungal spores of ergot to the flowers of susceptible grasses, where the spores germinate, infect, and destroy the ovaries of the plant. In an ear of rye infected with ergot, a sweet, yellowish mucus is exuded for a time, followed by a loss of starch as the ear ceases growth. The ovaries then become permeated by the mycelium, a mass of fungal filaments, which in autumn forms the spur-like purple-black sclerotium. The sclerotia, commonly called ergot, are shaped like grain kernels but are considerably larger and contain a number of poisonous alkaloids. A mature head of grain may carry several ergots in addition to noninfected kernels, and, although most ergots fall to the ground during harvest, some remain on the plants and are mixed with the grain. The ergots remaining on the ground overwinter and produce tiny black mushroom-shaped bodies that expel large numbers of spores in the spring, thus starting a new series of infections.
Ingestion of infected rye grains, either directly or by eating flour milled from infected rye, can cause ergotism in humans and livestock, a condition sometimes called St. Anthony’s Fire. The symptoms may include convulsions, hallucinations, miscarriage, and dry gangrene and may result in death. The disease was prevalent in northern Europe in the Middle Ages, particularly in regions of high rye-bread consumption, but its cause was not discovered until 1670. Although modern grain-cleaning and milling methods have practically eliminated the disease, contaminated flour may end up in bread and other food products if the ergot is not removed before milling.
The fungal sclerotium constitutes the source of the drugs ergonovine, which is used in obstetrics to control postpartum hemorrhage, and ergotamine, which is used in treating migraine headaches. Ergotism can occur after an overdose of ergot-derived medications. Ergot is also the source of lysergic acid, from which the powerful hallucinogen lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is easily synthesized.
