estrogen,  any of a group of hormones that primarily influence the female reproductive tract in its development, maturation, and function. There are three major hormones—estradiol, estrone, and estriol—among the estrogens, and estradiol is the predominant one.
The major sources of estrogens are the ovaries and the placenta (the temporary organ that serves to nourish the fetus and remove its wastes); additional small amounts are secreted by the adrenal glands and by the male testes. It is believed that the egg follicle (the saclike structure that holds the immature egg) and interstitial cells (certain cells in the framework of connective tissue) in the ovaries are the actual production sites of estrogens in the female. Estrogen levels in the bloodstream seem to be highest during the egg-releasing period (ovulation) and after menstruation, when tissue called the corpus luteum replaces the empty egg follicle.
Cholesterol is the parent molecule from which all ovarian steroid hormones are formed. Cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone, and pregnenolone is converted to progesterone. The steps in the conversion of progesterone to the main estrogens—estradiol and estrone—include the intermediate formation of several androgens (male sex hormones): dehydroepiandrosterone, androstenedione, and testosterone. In short, androgens are precursors of estrogens; they are converted to estrogens through the action of an enzyme known as aromatase. The ovaries are the richest source of aromatase, although some aromatase is present in adipose tissue, which is also an important source of estrogen in postmenopausal women. Estradiol, the most potent estrogen, is synthesized from testosterone. Estrone can be formed from estradiol, but its major precursor is androstenedione. Estriol, the weakest of the estrogens, is formed from both estrone and estradiol.
Once secreted into the blood, estrogens bind reversibly to a protein known as sex hormone-binding globulin. Thus, some of the hormone in serum is bound and some is free, or unbound. At its target tissues, the free hormone penetrates the cell surface and then binds to a protein known as an estrogen receptor in the cytoplasm of the cells. The estrogen-receptor complexes enter the cell nucleus, where they modulate protein synthesis by influencing the rate at which particular genes are transcribed. Gene transcription is the process by which DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) codes for certain proteins by producing specific molecules of messenger RNA (ribonucleic acid) that direct the synthesis of those proteins. In the case of estrogens, there are two types of cytoplasmic receptors—estrogen receptor-alpha and estrogen receptor-beta—that have a different tissue distribution but similar capacities to activate DNA synthesis.
In females, estrogens affect the ovaries, vagina, fallopian tubes, uterus, and mammary glands. In the ovaries, estrogens help to stimulate the growth of the egg follicle; they also stimulate the pituitary gland in the brain to release hormones that assist in follicular development. Once the egg is released, it travels through the fallopian tubes on its way to the uterus; in the fallopian tubes estrogens are responsible for developing a thick muscular wall and for the contractions that transport the egg and sperm cells.
Estrogens also build and maintain the endometrium, the mucous membrane that lines the uterus. They increase the endometrium’s size and weight, cell number, cell types, blood flow, protein content, and enzyme activity. Estrogens also stimulate the muscles in the uterus to develop and contract; contractions are important in helping the wall to slough off dead tissue during menstruation and during the delivery of a child and placenta. The cervix, the tip of the uterus, projects into the vagina and secretes mucus that enhances sperm transport; estrogens are thought to regulate the flow and thickness of these mucous secretions. The growth of the vagina to its adult size, the thickening of the vaginal wall, and the increase in vaginal acidity that reduces bacterial infections are also correlated to estrogen activities. The young female uterus, if deprived of estrogens, does not develop into its adult form, and the adult uterus that does not receive estrogens begins to show tissue degeneration.
In the breasts the actions of estrogens are complexly interrelated with those of other hormones, and their total significance is not easily defined. Estrogens are, however, responsible for growth of the breasts during adolescence, pigmentation of the nipples, and the eventual cessation of the flow of milk.
Actions of estrogens that are related to bone development and bone maintenance include the stimulation of bone formation and the closure of bone epiphyses, which causes linear growth to cease at the end of puberty, and the maintenance of bone throughout the reproductive years, which limits bone resorption and preserves bone strength.
Estrogens tend to decrease serum cholesterol concentrations and to increase serum triglyceride concentrations. The overall effect of these changes, perhaps in conjunction with direct effects of estrogens on blood vessels, is to protect against atherosclerosis before menopause. Estrogens also increase the serum concentrations of binding proteins that transport other substances, including the binding proteins for cortisol, thyroxine, and iron, as well as sex hormone-binding globulin.
Estrogens influence the structural differences between the male and female bodies. Usually the female bones are smaller and shorter, the pelvis is broader, and the shoulders are narrower. The female body is more curved and contoured because of fatty tissue that covers the muscles, breasts, buttocks, hips, and thighs. The body hair is finer and less pronounced, and the scalp hair is usually more permanent. The voice box is smaller and the vocal cords shorter, giving a higher-pitched voice than in males. In addition, estrogens suppress the activity of sebaceous (oil-producing) glands and thereby reduce the likelihood of acne in the female. In experimental animals, loss of estrogens diminishes the mating desires and other sexual behaviour patterns.
In the male, traces of estrogens are present in the blood and urine; estrogens seem to be most evident in the male during puberty and old age. Their function in the male and their interplay with the male hormones are not completely known.
