gout,  metabolic disorder characterized by recurrent acute attacks of severe inflammation in one or more of the joints of the extremities. Gout results from the deposition, in and around the joints, of uric acid salts, which are excessive throughout the body in persons with the disorder. Uric acid is a product of the breakdown of purines, compounds that are essential components of DNA and RNA and of many biosynthetic reactions and that are normally steadily excreted into the urine. Gout accounts for at least 5 percent of all cases of arthritis. However, it is uncommon in women; the male-female ratio is 20:1. Pseudogout (chondrocalcinosis) is a similar condition caused by deposits of calcium pyrophospate crystals in the joints.
Although gout is suspected to be an inborn disorder, the initial attack of acute joint inflammation, or gouty arthritis, usually does not appear until middle age. Any peripheral joint may be affected, but the joint at the base of the big toe is especially susceptible. Symptoms include redness of the skin and extreme tenderness, warmth, and pain of the affected joints. An attack, even when untreated, may subside in a week or two. Attacks may come and go without apparent reason, but there are a number of precipitating factors, including acute infection, emotional upset, excessive alcohol consumption, poor diet, obesity, diuresis, surgery, trauma, and the administration of certain medications. Precipitation of uric acid in the joint cartilage precedes the first attack. In some cases, continued deposition of uric acid salts may cause knobby deformities (tophi) and may also occur in cartilage that is not associated with the joints, such as the rim of the ear.
Many people who are affected by gout have family members who also have been affected; however, the pattern of inheritance of the disorder is unknown. Several genetic variations have been identified in association with abnormal uric acid metabolism. The best characterized of these variations occurs in a gene known as SLC2A9 (solute carrier family 2, member 9), which normally encodes a protein involved in maintaining uric acid homeostasis. Although the precise mechanisms by which variants of SLC2A9 increase susceptibility to gout is not known with certainty, scientists suspect that the variants produce abnormal proteins capable of disrupting uric acid transport and uptake into cells. Understanding the genetic mechanisms that give rise to gout may facilitate the identification of methods for prevention and the development of drugs for treatment of the disorder.
Treatment for an acute attack of gout includes the administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin and naproxen. Corticosteroids may also be injected into the affected joint to reduce inflammation. A medication called colchicine may be administered if NSAIDs and corticosteroids are not effective. Medications such as allopurinol, which reduces urate formation, and probenecid, which promotes urinary excretion of uric acid, are used to treat recurrent acute attacks. In addition, the frequency and severity of recurrent attacks may be reduced by supplementation with vitamin C, which increases excretion of uric acid by the kidneys, thereby decreasing the amount of uric acid circulating in the body.
