Skin disease,  any of the diseases or disorders that affect the human skin. They have a wide range of causes.
Although most diseases affecting the skin originate in the layers of the skin, such abnormalities are also important factors in the diagnosis of a variety of internal diseases. There is some truth in the belief that the skin mirrors a person’s internal health. Often, the visibility and accessibility of skin make it the first organ of the body to show detectable signs of underlying disease. Abnormalities of the skin frequently suggest metabolic, malignant, and glandular diseases.
Like other tissues, skin is afflicted by all types of pathological changes, including hereditary, inflammatory, benign and malignant (neoplastic), endocrine, hormonal, traumatic, and degenerative processes. Emotions affect the health of the skin as well. The reaction of the skin to these diseases and disorders differs from that of other tissues in many ways. For example, extensive inflammation of the skin may affect metabolism within other organs and systems of the body, causing anemia, circulatory collapse, disorders of body temperature, and disturbance of water and electrolyte balance in the blood. The skin has such vigorous healing properties, however, that widespread injury, as in thermal burns, may be followed by a marked degree of regrowth of the injured or diseased areas, with a disproportionally small degree of scarring.
The skin has an inherent region-specific anatomical diversity that may profoundly modify the appearance of a rash. This is apparent when skin transplanted from one area of the body to another (other than a symmetrically opposite area) retains the morphological characteristics of the donor area. Thus the morphology of eczema or lichen planus on the palms and soles may bear little or no resemblance to the same disease in the same individual on the face or scalp. In these instances a biopsy shows the abnormalities of the cells of the skin and the pattern and distribution of any invading cells. The ability to identify immunoreactants (immunoglobulins, or antibodies, that react with specific invading agents, or antigens) in skin biopsies has greatly increased the accuracy of the diagnosis of inflammatory disorders and has clarified their immunologic basis, especially in the blistering disorders.
The classification of hereditary skin disorders generally has been based upon gross morphological, histological, and electron microscopic findings; however, because a skin disease may not always have a characteristic presentation, the specific diagnosis sometimes has been in doubt. Better understanding of the biochemical defects underlying hereditary skin disorders now allows these conditions to be diagnosed with more precision. One subset of the ichthyoses, a group of sometimes disabling genetic skin disorders, may thus be delineated from other members of the group, based on biochemical detection of a specific enzyme defect (reduced steroid sulfatase enzyme).
The distribution of a rash depends on factors both intrinsic and extrinsic to the body. Mechanical factors (such as trauma, environmental agents, fungal or viral infections, and drugs) are among the most common extrinsic determinants of distribution. Environmental influences, such as sunburn and light-sensitive, drug-induced reactions, may also play a major role. Psoriasis and the rare hereditary blistering disorders collectively called epidermolysis bullosa owe their distributions to local trauma; lesions that show a predilection for the elbows, knees, and lower back are common in psoriasis, and those found in the hands, feet, knees, and mouth of children are indicative of epidermolysis bullosa. A lesion of an eruption that subsequently develops where a mechanical or other physical trauma was applied is termed an isomorphic reaction. Skin diseases in which isomorphic reactions are characteristic include lupus erythematosus (sunlight), psoriasis, lichen planus, and viral warts (mechanical trauma).
Intrinsic rather than extrinsic influences explain the characteristic systematic pattern of a number of rashes. Some rashes with a symmetrical and segmental distribution may owe their pattern to the segmental arrangement of the embryo. In other rashes, it is the distribution of the cutaneous nerve supply; for example, the pattern of the rash of herpes zoster (shingles) is determined by the cutaneous distribution of the infected sensory nerve dorsal root ganglion. The blood supply to the skin has a characteristic anatomical distribution that influences the pattern of certain skin eruptions in which cutaneous vascular narrowing or blood stasis is a major feature.
