Hydrocephalus,  accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles, or cavities, of the brain, causing progressive enlargement of the head. Normally, CSF continuously circulates through the brain and the spinal cord and is continuously drained into the circulatory system. In hydrocephalus the fluid accumulates in the two large lateral ventricles, and the brain and skull become enlarged because of the accumulation of fluid.
Hydrocephalus may be described as either communicating, in which the obstruction to the flow of CSF occurs outside the brain ventricles, or noncommunicating (also called obstructive hydrocephalus), in which the obstruction to the flow of CSF occurs within the ventricles. In rare cases communicating hydrocephalus arises from overproduction of CSF and thus does not involve a blockage of flow of the fluid. Hydrocephalus is often congenital, meaning that it is present at birth; however, it may be acquired and thus occurs later in life. Congenital hydrocephalus is typically caused by malformations of structures in the ventricles, including the ducts through which CSF flows. The most common congenital malformations that block the normal drainage of CSF affect the aqueduct of Sylvius, a canal that connects the third and fourth ventricles in the brain to the central canal of the spinal cord. Congenital hydrocephalus also can be caused by prenatal toxoplasmosis infection. The most common cause of acquired hydrocephalus is the development of a lesion in the brain, which may result from a tumour, stroke, or complications of head injuries.
Congenital hydrocephalus occurs in roughly two or three out of every 1,000 live births. Infants and young children with hydrocephalus have abnormally large heads because the pressure of the fluid in the brain has caused the individual skull bones—which have not fused with each other yet—to bulge outward at their juncture points. Compression of the brain by the accumulating fluid eventually causes convulsions and intellectual disability. Pressure within the brain can be reduced by surgical insertion of a permanent tube called a shunt that drains accumulated CSF into another area of the body where it can be absorbed.
