hypothalamus,  region of the brain lying below the thalamus and making up the floor of the third cerebral ventricle. The hypothalamus is an integral part of the brain. It is a small cone-shaped structure that projects downward from the brain, ending in the pituitary (infundibular) stalk, a tubular connection to the pituitary gland. The hypothalamus contains a control centre for many functions of the autonomic nervous system, and it has effects on the endocrine system because of its complex interaction with the pituitary gland.
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland are connected by both nervous and chemical pathways. The posterior portion of the hypothalamus, called the median eminence, contains the nerve endings of many neurosecretory cells, which run down through the infundibular stalk into the pituitary gland. Important structures adjacent to the median eminence of the hypothalamus include the mammillary bodies, the third ventricle, and the optic chiasm (a part of the visual system). Above the hypothalamus is the thalamus.
The hypothalamus, like the rest of the brain, consists of interconnecting neurons that are nourished by a rich supply of blood. To understand hypothalamic function, it is necessary to define the various forms of neurosecretion. First, there is neurotransmission, which occurs throughout the brain and is the process by which one nerve cell communicates with another via a synapse, a small gap between the ends (nerve terminals) of neurons. Nerve terminals are often called presynaptic or postsynaptic in reference to the direction in which an impulse is traveling, with the presynaptic neuron transmitting an impulse to the postsynaptic neuron. Transmission of an electrical impulse requires the secretion of a chemical substance that diffuses across the synapse from the presynaptic membrane of one neuron to the postsynaptic membrane of another neuron. The chemical substance that is secreted is called a neurotransmitter. The process of synthesis and secretion of neurotransmitters is similar to that of protein hormone synthesis, with the exception that the neurotransmitters are contained within neurosecretory granules that are produced in the cell body and migrate through the axon (a projection of the neuron) to the nerve terminal, from which they are discharged into the synaptic space.
There are four classic neurotransmitters: epinephrine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine. A large number of additional neurotransmitters have been discovered, of which an important group is the neuropeptides. The neuropeptides function not only as neurotransmitters but also as neuromodulators. As neuromodulators, they do not act directly as neurotransmitters but rather increase or decrease the action of neurotransmitters. Well-known examples are the opioids (e.g., enkephalins), so named because they are endogenous (produced in the human body) peptides (short chains of amino acids) with a strong affinity for the receptors that bind opiate drugs, such as morphine and heroin.
The brain and indeed the entire central nervous system consist of an interconnected network of neurons. The secretion of specific neurotransmitters and neuropeptides lends an organized, directed function to the overall system. The connection of the hypothalamus to many other regions of the brain, including the cerebral cortex, allows intellectual and functional signals, as well as external signals, including physical and emotional stresses, to be funneled into the hypothalamus to the endocrine system. From the endocrine system these signals are able to exert their effects throughout the body.
The hypothalamus produces and secretes not only neurotransmitters and neuropeptides but also several neurohormones that alter anterior pituitary gland function and two hormones, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) and oxytocin, that act on distant target organs. The neurons that produce and secrete neurohormones are true endocrine cells in that they produce hormones that are incorporated into secretory granules that are then carried through the axons and stored in nerve terminals located in the median eminence or posterior pituitary gland. In response to neural stimuli, the contents of the secretory granules are extruded from the nerve terminals into a capillary network. In the case of hormones that affect pituitary function, the contents of the secretory granules are carried through the hypophyseal-portal circulation and are delivered directly into the anterior pituitary gland.
These hypothalamic neurohormones are known as releasing hormones because their major function is to stimulate the secretion of hormones originating in the anterior pituitary gland. For example, certain releasing hormones secreted from the hypothalamus trigger the release from the anterior pituitary of substances such as adrenocorticotropic hormone and luteinizing hormone. The hypothalamic neurohormones consist of simple peptides ranging in size from only 3 amino acids (thyrotropin-releasing hormone) to 44 amino acids (growth hormone-releasing hormone). One hypothalamic hormone, somatostatin, has an inhibitory action, primarily inhibiting the secretion of growth hormone although it can also inhibit the secretion of other hormones. The neurotransmitter dopamine, produced in the hypothalamus, also has an inhibitory action, inhibiting the secretion of the anterior pituitary hormone prolactin. The cell bodies of the neurons that produce these neurohormones are not evenly distributed throughout the hypothalamus. Instead, they are grouped together in paired clusters of cell bodies known as nuclei.
A classic model for neurohormonal activity is the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (neurohypophysis). Its secretory products, vasopressin and oxytocin, are produced and packaged into neurosecretory granules in specific groups of nerve cells in the hypothalamus (the supraoptic nuclei and the paraventricular nuclei). The granules are carried through the axons that extend through the infundibular stalk and end in and form the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. In response to nerve signals, the secretory granules are extruded into a capillary network that feeds directly into the general circulation.
In addition to regulating the release of pituitary hormones, the hypothalamus also influences caloric intake and weight regulation, establishing a stable “set point” for individual weight gain. The hypothalamus also regulates body heat in response to variations in external temperature, determines wakefulness and sleep, and regulates fluid intake and sensation of thirst.
Injuries or diseases affecting the hypothalamus may produce symptoms of pituitary dysfunction or diabetes insipidus; in the latter disorder, the absence of vasopressin, which promotes the reabsorption of water in the kidneys, induces the rapid loss of water from the body through frequent urination. Hypothalamic disease can also cause insomnia and fluctuations in body temperature. In addition, the optic chiasm is particularly susceptible to pressure from expanding tumours or inflammatory masses in the hypothalamus or the pituitary gland. Pressure on the optic chiasm can result in visual defects or even blindness.
