in vitro fertilization (IVF), also called test-tube conception,  medical procedure in which mature egg cells are removed from a woman, fertilized with male sperm outside the body, and inserted into the uterus of the same or another woman for normal gestation. Although IVF with reimplantation of fertilized eggs (ova) has long been widely used in animal breeding, the first successful birth of a human child from IVF, carried out by British gynecologist Patrick Steptoe and British medical researcher Robert Edwards, did not take place until 1978.
In vitro fertilization is generally undertaken only after an exhaustive evaluation of infertility has been made. A number of the candidates for IVF are women who suffer from blocked or absent fallopian tubes; others are couples in which the male partner has a low sperm count or couples whose infertility is unexplained. The IVF procedure includes the recovery (by needle aspiration) of mature eggs and the incubation of the eggs in a culture medium, as well as the collection and preparation of sperm and its addition to the medium. In certain cases (e.g., low sperm count) intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) may be necessary. In this technique deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from sperm is injected via a needle into an egg. Fertilization generally occurs within 12 to 48 hours. The potential embryo is then placed in a growth medium, where it is observed periodically for division into two-cell, four-cell, and eight-cell stages. During this period the mother receives progesterone to prepare her uterine lining for implantation of the embryo. The embryo, which at this point is known as a blastocyst, is introduced through the cervix into the uterus, in which the blastocyst seems to float free for about three-and-a-half days. If the procedure is successful, the embryo implants itself in the uterine wall, and pregnancy begins.
Failure of IVF is typically the result of unsuccessful implantation or miscarriage. Possible explanations for failed implantation are immune rejection by the woman; an embryo with an abnormally thick outer membrane (zona pellucida) that prevents embryo hatching once inside the uterine cavity; lack of synchronization between embryonic stage and endometrial development at the time of embryo introduction into the uterus; and embryonic aneuploidy (abnormal chromosome number). Aneuploidy is a central cause of miscarriage in IVF.
In women who have had repeated IVF failures or who are over 38 years old, the success of IVF may be improved by preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). PGD is used to detect the presence of embryonic genetic abnormalities that have a high likelihood of causing implantation failure or miscarriage. In PGD a single cell is extracted from the embryo once the embryo has divided to produce more than five cells (this step—the extraction of a cell—is an inherent risk of PGD because it sometimes damages the embryo). The cell is then analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), a technique capable of detecting structural abnormalities in chromosomes that standard tests such as karyotyping cannot detect. In some cases DNA is isolated from the cell and analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of gene mutations that can give rise to certain disorders such as Tay-Sachs disease or cystic fibrosis. Another technique, known as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), may be used in conjunction with PGD to identify chromosomal abnormalities. CGH is more sensitive than FISH and is capable of detecting a variety of small chromosomal rearrangements, deletions, and duplications. It may also be useful in reducing the chance of multiple births (multiple embryos implanted and carried to term simultaneously) by identifying a single healthy embryo with the best chance for successful implantation. The success of IVF can also be improved through assisted hatching, a technique used to thin the outer membrane of an embryo in order to facilitate implantation.
In vitro fertilization has been a source of moral, ethical, and religious controversy since its development. Although members of all religious groups can be found on both sides of the issues, the major opposition has come from the Roman Catholic church, which in 1987 issued a doctrinal statement opposing IVF on three grounds: the destruction of human embryos not used for implantation; the possibility of in vitro fertilization by a donor other than the husband, thus removing reproduction from the marital context; and the severing of an essential connection between the conjugal act and procreation.
Other ethical questions raised have involved the unusually high rate of multiple births (twins, triplets, etc.) associated with IVF. This issue is being addressed primarily through the development of better techniques aimed at using fewer fertilized embryos to achieve pregnancy. For example, in the 1980s and 1990s an average of four fertilized embryos were transferred into a woman’s uterus to increase the chance of implantation and pregnancy. However, in the early 2000s, following the implementation of improved methods, just two embryos were transferred, while the same rate of success as with four embryos was maintained. The technique of single embryo transfer (SET) is available, though less than 10 percent of women opt for SET because it has a lower rate of success relative to multiple embryo transfer—in many cases at least two cycles of SET are necessary for success. Furthermore, many women are unable to afford additional cycles of IVF using SET and therefore are more likely to choose multiple embryo transfer, even though a multiple birth may be less desirous than a single birth. Thus, the incidence of twins has continued to rise, especially in the United States, where the rate of twin births has increased 70 percent since the 1980s.
IVF has also raised a number of unresolved moral issues concerning the freezing (cryopreservation) of ovaries, eggs, sperm, or embryos for future pregnancies.
