Inflammation,  a response triggered by damage to living tissues. The inflammatory response is a defense mechanism that evolved in higher organisms to protect them from infection and injury. Its purpose is to localize and eliminate the injurious agent and to remove damaged tissue components so that the body can begin to heal. The response consists of changes in blood flow, an increase in permeability of blood vessels, and the migration of fluid, proteins, and white blood cells (leukocytes) from the circulation to the site of tissue damage. An inflammatory response that lasts only a few days is called acute inflammation, while a response of longer duration is referred to as chronic inflammation.
Although acute inflammation is usually beneficial, it often causes unpleasant sensations, such as the pain of a sore throat or the itching of an insect bite. Discomfort is usually temporary and disappears when the inflammatory response has done its job. But in some instances inflammation can cause harm. Tissue destruction can occur when the regulatory mechanisms of the inflammatory response are defective or the ability to clear damaged tissue and foreign substances is impaired. In other cases an inappropriate immune response may give rise to a prolonged and damaging inflammatory response. Examples include allergic, or hypersensitivity, reactions, in which an environmental agent such as pollen, which normally poses no threat to the individual, stimulates inflammation, and autoimmune reactions, in which chronic inflammation is triggered by the body’s immune response against its own tissues.
The factors that can stimulate inflammation include microorganisms, physical agents, chemicals, inappropriate immunological responses, and tissue death. Infectious agents such as viruses and bacteria are some of the most common stimuli of inflammation. Viruses give rise to inflammation by entering and destroying cells of the body; bacteria release substances called endotoxins that can initiate inflammation. Physical trauma, burns, radiation injury, and frostbite can damage tissues and also bring about inflammation, as can corrosive chemicals such as acids, alkalis, and oxidizing agents. As mentioned above, malfunctioning immunological responses can incite an inappropriate and damaging inflammatory response. Inflammation can also result when tissues die from a lack of oxygen or nutrients, a situation that often is caused by loss of blood flow to the area.
The four cardinal signs of inflammation—redness (Latin rubor), heat (calor), swelling (tumor), and pain (dolor)—were described in the 1st century ad by the Roman medical writer Aulus Cornelius Celsus. Redness is caused by the dilation of small blood vessels in the area of injury. Heat results from increased blood flow through the area and is experienced only in peripheral parts of the body such as the skin. Fever is brought about by chemical mediators of inflammation and contributes to the rise in temperature at the injury. Swelling, called edema, is caused primarily by the accumulation of fluid outside the blood vessels. The pain associated with inflammation results in part from the distortion of tissues caused by edema, and it also is induced by certain chemical mediators of inflammation, such as bradykinin, serotonin, and the prostaglandins.
A fifth consequence of inflammation is the loss of function of the inflamed area, a feature noted by German pathologist Rudolf Virchow in the 19th century. Loss of function may result from pain that inhibits mobility or from severe swelling that prevents movement in the area.
When tissue is first injured, the small blood vessels in the damaged area constrict momentarily, a process called vasoconstriction. Following this transient event, which is believed to be of little importance to the inflammatory response, the blood vessels dilate (vasodilation), increasing blood flow into the area. Vasodilation may last from 15 minutes to several hours.
Next, the walls of the blood vessels, which normally allow only water and salts to pass through easily, become more permeable. Protein-rich fluid, called exudate, is now able to exit into the tissues. Substances in the exudate include clotting factors, which help prevent the spread of infectious agents throughout the body. Other proteins include antibodies that help destroy invading microorganisms.
As fluid and other substances leak out of the blood vessels, blood flow becomes more sluggish and white blood cells begin to fall out of the axial stream in the centre of the vessel to flow nearer the vessel wall. The white blood cells then adhere to the blood vessel wall, the first step in their emigration into the extravascular space of the tissue.
