Instinct,  an inborn impulse or motivation to action typically performed in response to specific external stimuli. Today instinct is generally described as a stereotyped, apparently unlearned, genetically determined behaviour pattern.
In the past the term instinct has stood for a number of distinct conceptions about animal behaviour. For example, Alexander Jamieson, in the first volume of his A Dictionary of Mechanical Science, Arts, Manufactures, and Miscellaneous Knowledge (1829), defined the term instinct as “an appellation given to the sagacity and natural inclinations of brutes, which supplies the place of reason in mankind.”
As a rough rendering of what the term instinct means to most people, this definition still has merit. If it is taken to include the possibility that humans too can be governed by instinct, this definition is broad and vague, encompassing the variety of senses that the term has since been used to convey. However, this inclusiveness is unable to distinguish the subtle differences of meaning encompassed by the terms instinct and instinctive.
The words instinct and instinctive have borne a variety of meanings in the many different contexts in which they have been used. Their varied meanings and connotations are encountered in everyday language. For example, instinct can refer to reflexive or stereotyped behaviour, to an intuitive hunch, to a congenital aptitude or disposition, to a deep-seated impulsion (e.g., “maternal instinct”), to ways of acting that do not appear to have involved learning or experience in their development, or to knowledge that is inborn or subconsciously acquired.
The concept of instinct is complicated by the fact that it ranges across behavioral, genetic, developmental, motivational, functional, and cognitive senses. There is also a likelihood that one of these senses might be taken to entail one or more of the others. For example, evidence that a pattern of behaviour depends upon a genetic basis frequently has been assumed to imply that the pattern is unlearned. The fallacy of this reasoning should have been betrayed by the commonplace knowledge that animals can be selectively bred for attributes (e.g., trail following and sheepherding in dogs) but require extensive training for their potential usefulness to be realized. Yet the dichotomous way of thinking continues to bedevil discussion and is the basis of the recurrent dispute known as the nature-nurture controversy (heredity versus environment), which entails debate over whether behaviour, intelligence, aptitude, character, and so forth are products of genetics or of exposure to environmental factors (e.g., culture). Even British naturalist Charles Darwin argued that inheritance implied development unaffected by experience.
Darwin was well aware that the term instinct was used in several different senses. At the beginning of the chapter titled “Instinct” in his crucial work On the Origin of Species (1859), he declined to attempt to define the term:
Darwin used the word instinct in a number of different ways—to refer to what impels a bird to breed; to a disposition, such as courage or obstinacy in a dog; to selectively bred patterns of behaviour such as the tumbling movements of tumbler pigeons; to feelings such as sympathy in people; and to stereotyped actions such as those employed by honeybees when constructing the cells of a honeycomb. It is regrettable that Darwin did not make the distinctions of the meaning of instinct more explicit, for he gave powerful precedent for the indiscriminate use of the word, the ambiguity of which has repeatedly clouded and confused the understanding of behaviour.
However, there also was a positive side to Darwin’s interest in instinct. He drew attention to questions about the causal basis of actions that seemed incapable of explanation in terms of learning or cognition, and it opened up the remarkable world of animal behaviour, which seemed far removed from the world of human nature. Thus, Darwin’s legacy has stimulated the study of motivation and provided a foundation for comparative psychology and for ethology.
The following review is accordingly divided between instinct construed as impulsion, or drive; instinct viewed as inborn propensity; and instinct interpreted as behaviour.
Instinct as some kind of urge or driving force is exemplified by three very different kinds of motivational theory: Freudian psychoanalysis; inherent purpose, as defined by American psychologist William McDougall; and causal conceptions, as proposed by classical ethology.
