Integument,  in biology, network of features that forms the covering of an organism. The integument delimits the body of the organism, separating it from the environment and protecting it from foreign matter. At the same time it gives communication with the outside, enabling an organism to live in a particular environment.
Among unicellular organisms, such as bacteria and protozoans, the integument corresponds to the cell membrane and any secreted coating that the organism produces. In most invertebrate animals a layer (or layers) of surface (epithelial) cells—often with additional secreted coatings—constitutes the integument. Among the vertebrates the boundary covering—with a variety of derived elements such as scales, feathers, and hair—has assumed the complexity of an organ system, the integumentary system.
The integument is composed of layers that may be of single cell thickness, as in many invertebrates, or multiple cell thickness, as in some invertebrates and all vertebrates. In every case the cells that give rise to the integuments belong to that class of tissue called epithelium, which in most animals is called epidermis. Underlying the epidermis and supplying it with nourishment is the dermis. In addition to the cellular layers, the integument often includes a noncellular coating, or cuticle, that is secreted by the epidermis. Such coatings are found in most invertebrates. The vertebrate skin has generated many kinds of glands and a variety of horny structures, but it lacks coatings.
The wide diversity of integuments among vertebrates further exemplifies the adaptive character of the body covering: from the almost impenetrable shield of an armadillo and the dense furry coat of an Arctic bear to the slimy, scaled covering of a cod and the exceptionally smooth skin of a porpoise. Amphibians and fishes often have mucous glands that lubricate their skins and prevent waterlogging and deterioration. Reptiles have thick, leathery skins that help reduce water loss and serve as an armour against enemies. Birds use their feathers—skin derivatives—to fly and to insulate their bodies. The hairy or furry coats of many terrestrial mammals insulate them, shed water, and provide a dense guard against injury.
The integuments of unicellular organisms comprise the cell membrane and any coating it secretes. Almost all bacteria have an external cell wall that maintains the shape and turgidity of the cell and affords protection. Multicellular invertebrates, however, have a single outer layer of epithelial cells, and these may secrete a variety of surface coatings, ranging from the mucous coat of cnidarians (polyps, sea anemones, jellyfish) to the tough cuticle of insects. The epithelial layer may include cells of several types, such as sensory cells, gland cells, and stinging cells, and the outer surfaces may bear microvilli, cilia, or other fine projections. In addition, the cells may produce excrescences such as bristles, spines, knobs, and ridges.
The firmness of some invertebrate animals, such as annelids (earthworms, marine worms, and leeches) and certain mollusks, depends on the distension by water of the individual cells that form the body wall. In many other forms rigid skeletal materials are deposited either within the cells or on the outer surface. The noncellular coatings of invertebrate integuments are exceedingly varied in composition and extent, and they cut across taxonomic categories. These rigid structures may provide no more than a protective armour, but in the arthropods, including crustaceans, insects, and spiders, a multilayered and hardened integument forms an exoskeleton to which muscles are attached. In the echinoderms, the exoskeleton lies below the epidermis.
