Osteoarthritis, also called osteoarthrosis or degenerative joint disease,  disorder of the joints characterized by progressive deterioration of the articular cartilage or of the entire joint, including the articular cartilage, the synovium (joint lining), the ligaments, and the subchondral bone (bone beneath the cartilage). Osteoarthritis is the most common joint disease, although estimates of incidence and prevalence vary across different regions of the world and among different populations. By some estimates nearly 10 percent of men and about 18 percent of women over age 60 are affected by the condition. Although its suffix indicates otherwise, osteoarthritis is not characterized by excessive joint inflammation as is the case with rheumatoid arthritis. The disease may be asymptomatic, especially in the early years of its onset. As it progresses, however, pain, stiffness, and a limitation in movement may develop. Common sites of discomfort are the vertebrae, knees, and hips—joints that bear much of the weight of the body.
The cause of osteoarthritis is not completely understood, but biomechanical forces that place stress on the joints (e.g., bearing weight, postural or orthopedic abnormalities, or injuries that cause chronic irritation of the bone) are thought to interact with biochemical and genetic factors to contribute to osteoarthritis. Early stages of the condition are characterized by changes in cartilage thickness, which in turn are associated with an imbalance between cartilage breakdown and repair. The cartilage eventually becomes softened and roughened. Over time the cartilage wears away, and the subchondral bone, deprived of its protective cover, attempts to regenerate the destroyed tissue, resulting in increased bone density at the site of damage and an uneven remodeling of the surface of the joint. Thick bony outgrowths called spurs sometimes develop. Articulation of the joint becomes difficult. These developments are compounded by a reduction in synovial fluid, which acts as a natural joint lubricant and shock absorber.
Depending on the site and severity of the disease, various treatments are employed. Individuals who experience moderate symptoms can be treated by a combination of the following: analgesic (pain-relieving) medications, periodic rest, weight reduction, corticosteroid injections, and physical therapy or exercise. Surgical procedures such as hip or knee replacement or joint debridement (the removal of unhealthy tissue) may be necessary to relieve more severe pain and improve joint function. Injections of a joint lubricant consisting of hyaluronic acid, a substance normally found in synovial fluid, can help relieve pain and joint stiffness in some persons with osteoarthritis.
Researchers have also been investigating the therapeutic potential of the purine nucleoside adenosine, a substance that is found naturally in cells and that has been developed into a drug for medical use. Studies in animals have shown that replenishing adenosine levels in diseased joints can aid cartilage regrowth.
