Ovum, plural ova,  in human physiology, single cell released from either of the female reproductive organs, the ovaries, which is capable of developing into a new organism when fertilized (united) with a sperm cell.
The outer surface of each ovary is covered by a layer of cells (germinal epithelium); these surround the immature egg cells, which are present in the ovaries from the time of birth. A hollow ball of cells, the follicle, encompasses each ovum. Within the follicle the ovum gradually matures (see oogenesis). It takes about four months for a follicle to develop once it is activated. Some follicles lie dormant for 40 years before they mature; others degenerate and never develop. During child-bearing years, 300 to 400 follicles mature and emit eggs capable of being fertilized. By the time a woman reaches menopause, most remaining follicles have degenerated.
A follicle-stimulating hormone, secreted into the bloodstream by the pituitary, causes ovum growth. After the egg matures, a second hormone from the pituitary, luteinizing hormone, is liberated; this causes the egg’s release, called ovulation (q.v.).
As the ovum develops, the walls of the follicle expand by adding new cells. The follicle and ovum slowly migrate through the tissue of the ovary until they cause a bulge in the surface of the organ. The hollow cavity between the egg and the follicular wall usually contains a fluid secreted by the follicular cells. This keeps the ovum moist and provides a suitable growing environment. When the follicle ruptures, the egg is released from the ovary and is then captured and guided by the fallopian tubes. Muscular contractions of the fallopian tubes move the egg to the cavity of the uterus.
The ovum itself has a central nucleus that contains the female’s genetic material; this, with the genetic material in the sperm cell, determines the inherited characteristics of the child. Surrounding the nucleus is a cell plasma, or yolk, that contains nutritional elements essential to the developing egg cell.
If an egg does not become fertilized within 24 hours of its eruption, it begins to degenerate. After the egg is fertilized it undergoes a series of cell divisions. If at an early stage of its development the fertilized egg splits into two parts that continue to grow, identical twins will result; incomplete division will result in Siamese twins, born physically joined. Fraternal twins result when two separate eggs are released and independently fertilized. See also implantation.
