Papillomavirus, also spelled papilloma virus,  any of a subgroup of viruses belonging to the family Papillomaviridae that infect birds and mammals, causing warts (papillomas) and other benign tumours, as well as malignant cancers of the genital tract and the uterine cervix in humans. They are small polygonal viruses containing circular double-stranded DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). More than 100 distinct types of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) have been identified by DNA analysis, and there are numerous types of animal papillomaviruses, including bovine papillomavirus (BPV), canine oral papillomavirus (COPV), and cottontail rabbit papillomavirus (CRPV; or Shope papillomavirus).
Skin warts are the most common sign of infection with papillomavirus. In humans warts may be of two types—flat (which are superficial and usually on the hands) or plantar (on the soles of the feet and on the toes). Warts also commonly occur on the genitals (condylomata acuminata). In humans and most other animals, papillomas—whether found on the skin or occurring in the mucous membranes of the genital, anal, or oral cavities—are benign and may actually go unnoticed for years. In humans a minority of genital and venereal warts are visible, painful, or itchy, and the papillomaviruses that cause these warts are transmitted by sexual intercourse. It is estimated that about 10 percent of the adult population in developed countries has papilloma infections of the genital tract. A number of HPVs have been linked with various precancerous lesions and malignant tumours, especially cervical cancers in women. In fact, one or more of these high-risk-type HPVs have been found in more than 90 percent of women diagnosed with cervical cancer. Their presence can be detected through an ordinary pap smear. In 2006 the first vaccine against HPV was approved. The vaccine is effective in preventing most cases of cervical cancer in women who have never been infected previously with the virus.
Animal papillomaviruses can be transmitted in several ways and can cause a variety of warts and benign and malignant diseases. In cattle BPV can be transmitted from infected females to susceptible calves through skin contact during suckling or from bulls to females during breeding. Some cattle develop fibropapillomas, in which a wart contains both epithelial and connective tissues. Fibropapillomas are the most common type of benign growth found in cattle, sometimes occurring endemically on farms, and may be found on the head, legs, neck, penis, or teats. In the case of oral papillomaviruses such as COPV in dogs, warts may appear on the lips and spread to the tongue and the mucosal lining inside the oral cavity. In dogs with COPV these warts may sometimes become so numerous that they interfere with eating. Puppies with weak immune systems are most susceptible to COPV infection, though warts typically regress upon maturation of immune function. In rabbits infected with CRPV, warts may be persistent and become cancerous, causing squamous cell carcinoma. Warts usually appear on skin that is not protected by fur (e.g., ears, nose, and anus), which has led to the theory that the virus is likely transmitted to rabbits through the bite of an infected tick or other insect. CRPV can also be transmitted between rabbits.
