Precocious puberty,  abnormally early onset of human sexual development. In girls, precocious puberty is defined as the onset of menstruation before age 8, and in boys it is defined as sexual development before age 9. True precocious puberty is characterized by normal pubertal development at an abnormally early age, sometimes as early as age 2.
In girls, early onset of puberty is followed by adult cyclic hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian function, including ovulation; thus, a young girl affected by the disorder can become pregnant. The rise in estrogen production also stimulates skeletal growth, followed by premature closure of the epiphyses (expanded ends of the long bones), with eventual short stature. In most girls the cause of this disorder is unknown (idiopathic), and affected girls are otherwise normal. Occasionally it is caused by a tumour or other abnormality of the hypothalamus that results in the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). GnRH stimulates the release of female gonadotropins (i.e., luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone) from the pituitary gland, and these hormones in turn stimulate the growth and development of the ovaries.
Treatment is important for proper psychological and social development and to prevent short stature. In the past, affected girls were often treated with a progestin (a natural or synthetic agent with effects similar to progesterone), thereby inhibiting the secretion of gonadotropins from the pituitary, which resulted in some regression of breast development and cessation of menstruation but often did not prevent short stature. This form of treatment has been superseded by long-acting derivatives of GnRH that down-regulate GnRH receptors on the gonadotropin-secreting cells of the pituitary. Thus, gonadotropin secretion decreases, ovarian function ceases, and, in most girls, pubertal development gradually declines and growth rate slows.
Precocious pseudopuberty is partial pubertal development that results from autonomous (gonadotropin-independent) production of estrogen in prepubertal girls. Affected girls have premature development of their breasts and pubic hair, experience rapid growth, and may have irregular vaginal bleeding (due to the stimulatory effects of estrogen alone on the endometrium). However, these girls do not have true menstrual cycles and are not fertile. Precocious pseudopuberty is usually caused by an ovarian tumour, a chorionic gonadotropin-secreting tumour (tumours that secrete a hormone normally produced by the placenta that stimulates the ovaries), or exogenous estrogen (e.g., certain environmental or industrial chemicals). Affected girls must be evaluated carefully to find the cause of the disorder, and they must be treated accordingly—for example, by removal of the tumour.
Boys, similar to girls, can undergo true precocious puberty or various forms of precocious pseudopuberty. In true precocious puberty there is premature activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testes axis, with spermatogenesis, virilization, and growth acceleration, which paradoxically causes premature closure of the epiphyseal disks and short stature. The causes of precocious puberty in boys include hypothalamic tumours and other brain tumours, traumatic brain injuries, and various brain disorders. However, in some boys no cause can be found (idiopathic precocious puberty). Because damage to the brain or disorders of the brain are the primary causes of true precocious puberty in boys, neurosurgical intervention may be needed. If neurosurgical intervention is unsuccessful or if no cause is found, affected boys can be treated with long-acting derivatives of GnRH that down-regulate GnRH receptors on the gonadotropin-secreting cells of the anterior pituitary. Thus, gonadotropin secretion decreases, testicular function ceases, and, in most boys, growth rate slows.
Precocious pseudopuberty is partial pubertal development that results from autonomous (gonadotropin-independent) production of testosterone in a prepubertal boy. Affected boys have premature virilization and rapid growth, but they do not produce sperm. Precocious pseudopuberty may be caused by a liver tumour or other tumour that secretes human chorionic gonadotropin (a hormone normally produced by the placenta), an adrenal or testicular tumour, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a mutation that results in activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor (testotoxicosis), or exogenous androgen (e.g., caused by the intake of steroid drugs). Similar to girls, affected boys must be evaluated to find the cause of the condition, and they must be treated accordingly.
