Progeria,  any of several rare human disorders associated with premature aging. The two major types of progeria are Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), which has its onset in early childhood, and Werner syndrome (adult progeria), which occurs later in life. A third condition, Hallerman-Streiff-François syndrome, is characterized by the presence of progeria in combination with dwarfism and other features of abnormal growth. Progeria is extremely rare; for example, the global incidence of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome is approximately one in every four to eight million births.
Signs of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome appear at about age one, after an evidently normal infancy. Affected individuals seldom exceed the size of a normal 5-year-old, although they have the physical appearance of 60-year-old adults by the time they are 10. Many of the superficial aspects of aging, such as baldness, thinning of the skin, prominence of blood vessels of the scalp, and vascular diseases, occur. Sex organs remain small and underdeveloped. A few individuals with progeria are intellectually disabled, but most have normal intelligence and may even be precocious. By age 10, extensive arteriosclerosis and heart disease have developed, and most patients die before they reach 30; the median age of death is 13. The condition is not inherited. Rather, it results from the spontaneous mutation of a gene known as LMNA (lamin A/C). Only a single copy of the mutated gene is needed in each cell to cause the disease; hence, it is an autosomal dominant disorder.
Werner syndrome typically appears following puberty, with visible signs of aging becoming most apparent after age 20. The aging changes are such that affected persons look about 30 years older than their chronological age. Individuals may not attain their projected adult height, since the growth spurt of adolescence may be blunted. Patients with Werner syndrome are sexually mature, but secondary sex characteristics are poorly developed. Superficial signs of aging are premature balding or graying of hair, loss of teeth and hearing, cataracts, acute arthritic episodes, skin ulcers, and osteoporosis (loss of bony tissue). There is an increased tendency to develop heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and cancer, and the average life span is 47 years. Werner syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene WRN (Werner syndrome, RecQ helicase-like). This type of progeria is hereditary and is transmitted as a recessive trait (two copies of the mutated gene, one from each parent, are required to cause the disease).
Initially, progeria was studied as a model of normal aging, but, because not all organs are affected, this is no longer thought to be appropriate. There is, for example, no evidence of senility or of aging in the central nervous system. There is some experimental evidence suggesting that treatment with a drug known as n-acetylcysteine could slow the aging process associated with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.
