r-selected species, also called r-strategist,  species whose populations are governed by their biotic potential (maximum reproductive capacity, r). Such species make up one of the two generalized life-history strategies posited by American ecologist Robert MacArthur and American biologist Edward O. Wilson; K-selected species—that is, species whose population sizes fluctuate at or near their carrying capacity (K)—make up the second strategy.
The production of numerous small offspring followed by exponential population growth is the defining characteristic of r-selected species. They require short gestation periods, mature quickly (and thus require little or no parental care), and possess short life spans. Unlike K-selected species, members of this group are capable of reproduction at a relatively young age; however, many offspring die before they reach reproductive age.
In addition, r-selected species thrive in disturbed habitats, such as freshly burned grasslands or forests characterized by canopies that open abruptly, such as when a forest’s tallest trees have been knocked down by a windstorm. Temporary environments, such as vernal ponds and carrion, also harbour r-selected species. Under such conditions those organisms respond opportunistically, becoming the first ones to stake their claims to unused resources, such as nutrients, sunlight, and living space. Although their numbers may soar initially after an unpredictable event disturbed a habitat in which they reside or can easily colonize, this effect is often temporary. When other, more-competitive species move in or when the effects of overcrowding set in, the population will often decline rapidly.
Population growth in r-selected species behaves according to the exponential growth equation: 
In this equation N is the number of individuals in the population and t is time. The factor (1–[N/K]) is often added to the equation to place an upper limit on population growth by accounting for environmental resistance.
Examples of r-selected species include pest organisms, such as rodents, insects, and weeds.
