Rice bacterial blight, also called bacterial blight of rice,  deadly bacterial disease that is among the most destructive afflictions of cultivated rice (Oryza sativa and O. glaberrima). In severe epidemics, crop loss may be as high as 75 percent, and millions of hectares of rice are infected annually. The disease was first observed in 1884–85 in Kyushu, Japan, and the causal agent, the bacterium Xanthomonas oryzae pathovar oryzae (also referred to as Xoo), was identified in 1911, at that time having been named Bacillus oryzae. Thriving in warm, humid environments, bacterial blight has been observed in rice-growing regions of Asia, the western coast of Africa, Australia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. Although not commonly found in the United States, a bacterial strain related to Xoo has been listed as an agricultural select agent by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, a designation that places it under strict regulations.
Bacterial blight first becomes evident as water-soaked streaks that spread from the leaf tips and margins, becoming larger and eventually releasing a milky ooze that dries into yellow droplets. Characteristic grayish white lesions then appear on the leaves, signaling the late stages of infection, when leaves dry out and die. In seedlings, the leaves dry out and wilt, a syndrome known as kresek. Infected seedlings usually are killed by bacterial blight within two to three weeks of being infected; adult plants may survive, though rice yield and quality are diminished.
Since rice paddies are flooded throughout most of the growing season, Xoo may easily spread among crops; bacteria travel through the water from infected plants to the roots and leaves of neighbouring rice plants. Wind and water may also help spread Xoo bacteria to other crops and rice paddies. Various mechanisms of disease, including quorum sensing and biofilm formation, have been observed in rice bacterial blight and Xoo. In addition to rice, Xoo may infect other plants, such as rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), Chinese sprangletop (Leptochloa chinensis), and common grasses and weeds. In nongrowing seasons, Xoo may survive in rice seeds, straw, other living hosts, water, or, for brief periods, soil.
Methods of controlling rice bacterial blight are limited in effectiveness. Chemical control has been largely ineffective in minimizing bacterial blight because of safety concerns, practicality, and bacterial resistance. Biological control methods, which rely on the use of bacterial antagonists of pathogens (disease-causing organisms), can reduce bacterial blight, though their use has been limited. The most-common method of defending against rice bacterial blight is the cultivation of rice varieties with genes that confer resistance to Xoo infection. Over 30 resistance genes, termed Xa1 to Xa33, have been identified in rice plants, and some, such as Xa21, have been integrated into the genomes of commercial rice strains. These resistant rice varieties have been largely successful, dramatically reducing yield losses in many rice-producing countries.
