Rot,  any of several plant diseases, caused by any of hundreds of species of soil-borne bacteria, fungi, and funguslike organisms (Oomycota). Rot diseases are characterized by plant decomposition and putrefaction. The decay may be hard, dry, spongy, watery, mushy, or slimy and may affect any plant part.
Basal rot, also known as bulb rot, is a widespread disease that can infect all flower and crop bulbs and is caused by a variety of fungi and bacteria. Shoots fail to emerge or leaves are stunted and yellow to reddish or purplish; the leaves later wilt and die.
Gray mold rot is caused by fungi in the genus Botrytis, usually B. cinerea. The disease is characterized by soft, tan to brown spots or blotches that become covered with a dusty mold. Gray mold rot can cause seedlings, young shoots, and leaves to wither and collapse and can cause buds, flowers, and fruits to become flecked and rotten. Most vegetables, fruits, flowers, and woody plants are susceptible.
Most trees are susceptible to heart rot, a fungal disease that produces a discoloured, lightweight, spongy, crumbly, or powdery heart decay. Celery and certain root crops are also vulnerable.
Root rot is caused by numerous fungi, especially Armillaria mellea, Clitocybe tabescens, and Fusarium, and many oomycetes, including Pythium, Phytophthora, and Aphanomyces. Plants lose vigour, become stunted and yellow, and may wilt or die back and drop some leaves. They do not respond to fertilizer and water. Trees so affected die gradually; roots decay and may be covered with mold or black stringlike strands called rhizomorphs (Armillaria, Clitocybe). Root rot can be avoided by growing disease-free plants and resistant varieties in well-drained, well-prepared soil with a high content of organic matter; rotating annuals and biennials; avoiding overcrowding and root or crown injury; maintaining vigour by proper fertilization, watering, pruning, and cultivation; and controlling rodents, insects, nematodes, and weeds. Seedbed drenches of fungicides are often beneficial for limited areas of flowers, shrubs, and trees. Soil for use in seedbeds and in pots can be sterilized by heating or by chemical treatment.
Seed rot results in row skips and a poor, irregular stand; it is especially troublesome in cold, wet, heavy soils.
Wood rot destroys economically significant amounts of timber each year. It is caused by hundreds of fungi, including species of Daedalea, Fomes, Lenzites, Polyporus, Poria, and Stereum. Affected wood is often discoloured or stained, lightweight, soft, crumbly, or powdery. Damage usually occurs slowly, often over a period of many years. Infection occurs almost entirely through wounds. Hoof- to shelf-shaped fruiting bodies (conks) develop along the trunk and branches; or mushrooms may form at the trunk base or at the sites of wounds. A fruiting body or mushroom cluster indicates extensive decay. Wood rot can be avoided by removing dead and dying branches, making pruning cuts flush with the stems (leaving no stubs as possible entry for fungi), and wrapping young trees to protect against tree borers that can carry the causal fungi. Tree wound dressings are of doubtful value in preventing rots.
