sexually transmitted disease (STD), also called sexually transmitted infection,  any disease (such as syphilis, gonorrhea, AIDS, or a genital form of herpes simplex) that is usually or often transmitted from person to person by direct sexual contact. It may also be transmitted from a mother to her child before or at birth or, less frequently, may be passed from person to person in nonsexual contact (such as in kissing, in tainted blood transfusions, or in the use of unsanitized hypodermic syringes). Sexually transmitted diseases usually affect initially the genitals, the reproductive tract, the urinary tract, the oral cavity, the anus, or the rectum but may mature in the body to attack various organs and systems. Tertiary syphilis, or paresis, for example, may affect skin, bones, the central nervous system, the heart, the liver, or other organs. Persons infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of AIDS, may remain outwardly healthy for years before the disease takes hold within the immune system.
The term venereal disease (VD), denoting any disease transmitted by sexual intercourse, lost favour in the late 20th century and was largely supplanted by the more-comprehensive terms sexually transmitted disease and sexually transmitted infection.
Sexually transmitted diseases have a long history. The best known of these diseases, syphilis, is caused by the bacterium Treponema pallidum. Syphilis was first widely reported by European writers in the 16th century, and some medical historians assume that it was imported into Europe by explorers returning from the New World. Other authorities believe that syphilis is of ancient origin and may at one time have been mistakenly identified as leprosy. At any rate, syphilis first became widely recognized and reported in the late 1490s, when a virtual epidemic swept through Europe.
Urethritis is the infection and inflammation of the urethra (the passage that transmits urine from the bladder to the exterior of the body). Most cases of urethritis are in fact sexually transmitted. Urethritis that is caused by the gonococcus bacterium (Neisseria gonorrhoeae) is called gonorrhea. Gonorrhea was named by the Greek physician Galen and is thought to have been known to the ancient Chinese and Egyptians.
Syphilis and gonorrhea were long thought to be one disease. Real progress in characterizing them did not occur until the early 20th century, when their different causative microorganisms were identified and reliable diagnostic tests were developed. Effective treatment in the form of sulfa drugs and penicillin was introduced in the 1930s and ’40s, and the eradication of such diseases seemed imminent. By the end of the 1950s, however, the frequency index had begun to rise again. Among the many reasons cited were the tapering off of active “anti-VD” campaigns, the causative microorganisms’ growing immunity to the antibiotics used in treatment, and a variety of sociological factors influencing sexual behaviour. Despite campaigns to encourage the use of condoms and a return to “safe sex” in the 1990s, syphilis and gonorrhea remained major global health issues in the early 21st century.
A disease that became especially widespread beginning in the 1960s and ’70s was genital herpes (see herpes simplex). Herpes infections are significant not only in terms of the discomfort they cause but also for the potentially serious illness that might occur in infants born to mothers with genital herpes infections. A variety of treatments have been used for genital herpes, but none have been entirely satisfactory.
The sexually transmitted disease that caused perhaps the greatest alarm in the late 20th century was acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS. From the time of its first clear identification in 1981, HIV, the cause of AIDS, spread rapidly, with reported cases of infection rising at a high rate, especially among homosexuals and intravenous drug users in the United States and western Europe and among heterosexuals in tropical Africa. The high mortality rate from AIDS and the absence of a cure or vaccine against the disease had a sobering effect on sexually permissive societies. Promiscuity tended to be more widely discouraged, and the adoption of practices presumed to constitute “safe sex” (or, rather, safer sex)—such as the use of condoms or avoiding anal intercourse—tended to be encouraged.
Nearly a score of other sexually transmitted diseases are known. All have reasonably effective drug cures. About half of all cases of urethritis that are not gonorrhea are chlamydia, which is caused by an infection with Chlamydia trachomatis. The latter bacterium is also the infecting agent in pelvic inflammatory disease and in still another sexually transmitted disease, lymphogranuloma venereum. The cause for the remaining 50 percent of nongonococcal urethral infections is not known; no organism has been definitely related.
Trichomoniasis is an infection of the urogenital tract caused by a protozoan, Trichomonas vaginalis; males usually have no symptoms with this infection, and only a portion of infected females have a vaginal discharge.
Candidiasis (yeast infection) is caused by Candida albicans (sometimes called Monilia albicans), which produces in women a thick, whitish vaginal discharge and causes irritation and itching in the genital area. Males may have irritation of the glans or skin of the penis. Because this yeast is ubiquitous in the environment, these infections are not always sexually acquired.
