skin cancer,  disease characterized by the uncontrolled growth of cells in the skin. Skin cancers are of two distinct types: nonmelanoma and melanoma. Together they account for approximately half of all reported cancers. Melanomas are cancers of pigmented cells and are far more dangerous than nonmelanomas, which are the most common cancers in the United States. This article discusses nonmelanoma skin cancers.
Nonmelanomas are cancers of surface tissues (carcinomas). There are two forms of nonmelanoma, both of which can usually be cured with minor surgery. Squamous cell carcinomas develop from a layer of flat cells close to the skin’s surface and account for about one-fourth of nonmelanoma cases. Basal cell carcinomas account for roughly three-fourths of cases, and as many as 50 percent of patients with this form of the disease develop another skin cancer within five years of initial diagnosis. Basal cell carcinoma begins in a layer of cells underlying the squamous cells. The squamous and basal cell layers are both located in the epidermis.
Most cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer are caused by damage to DNA resulting from exposure to ultraviolet radiation of the sun. People with light complexions have a higher rate of skin cancer than those with dark skin, and males are more likely to develop skin cancer than females. Exposure to substances such as arsenic, coal, and tar has been linked to skin cancer, as has infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly those infections causing genital warts. Other factors that increase skin cancer rates are chronic inflammatory skin diseases, long-term treatment for psoriasis, previous radiation treatment, and immune suppression. The rare congenital disorders xeroderma pigmentosum and basal cell nevus are also associated with increased risk.
The predominant symptom of nonmelanoma skin cancer is an unusual growth, mole, or other abnormal appearance on the skin. Abnormalities may be raised or flat and may be red, pink, black, blue, brown, or flesh-coloured. Moles or growths that are new, that grow or change shape rapidly, or that will not heal are particular signs of skin cancer and should be examined by a dermatologist.
If cancer is suspected, a diagnosis is made following a skin biopsy. Depending on the severity of the skin lesion, a biopsy can be conducted by scraping surface cells, by using a narrow punch to extract a larger tissue sample, or by excising a section of skin and surrounding tissue with a scalpel.
Once nonmelanoma skin cancer has been diagnosed, its stage is determined to indicate how far the cancer has progressed. Stage 0 skin cancer is also called squamous cell carcinoma in situ, or Bowen disease, and is confined to the epidermis. Stage I cancers are 2 cm (approximately 3/4 inch) or less in size; stage II, more than 2 cm. Neither has spread beyond the skin. Stage III cancers have spread to deeper layers of the skin, underlying tissues, or nearby lymph nodes. Stage IV cancers have spread to other parts of the body such as the muscles, bones, lungs, nerves, or brain.
Very few cases of nonmelanoma spread to other tissues before they are detected and removed. Basal cell carcinomas rarely spread to surrounding tissues, and five-year survival rates approach 100 percent when these cancers are detected early, as most are. A small percentage of basal cell carcinomas spread to nearby lymph nodes and surrounding tissues; the five-year survival rate in these cases is very low. Squamous cell carcinomas also have an extremely high five-year survival rate when detected early, but the rate drops considerably if the cancer has spread.
If diagnosed early, nonmelanoma skin cancers can be cured with minor surgery to remove the affected tissue. Removal may be accomplished by a simple surgical excision, by freezing the cells with liquid nitrogen, or by destroying them with a laser. In some superficial cancers the cells may be removed by merely scraping them off; any residual cancer cells are then killed with pulses of electricity. A procedure known as Moh surgery shaves off cells one layer at a time, stopping when microscopic analysis indicates that no cancer remains. In some cases, removal of nearby lymph nodes may also be necessary.
Radiation therapy can be used to cure very small cancers or to delay progression of larger cancers. It is sometimes used in conjunction with surgery to kill any cancer cells left behind. Side effects of radiation treatment may include vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, or skin irritation resembling a sunburn or suntan.
Chemotherapy is sometimes used to treat skin cancers by directly applying a chemotherapeutic agent to the affected tissue; this reduces side effects, which can resemble those of radiation treatment. In the rare cases when nonmelanoma has spread to distant tissues, systemic chemotherapy may be necessary, although it generally will not cure the cancer.
Skin cancer can be prevented by avoiding risk factors, particularly exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Sunlamps and tanning beds should be avoided, and the skin should be protected with sunscreen or clothing when outdoors. Some medical societies recommend a skin examination by a physician every three years for people between the ages of 20 and 40 and yearly examinations thereafter. Regular self-examinations of the skin are also recommended, and any unusual growth or appearance should be checked by a physician.
