Speech disorder,  any of the disorders that impair human speech.
Human communication relies largely on the faculty of speech, supplemented by the production of certain sounds, each of which is unique in meaning. Human speech is extraordinarily complex, consisting of sound waves of a diverse range of frequencies, intensities, and amplitudes that convey specific information. The production and reception of these sounds require a properly functioning ear and auditory system, as well as intact and healthy vocal and sound-generating structures, including the larynx, the tongue, and the lips.
Vocal communication can be rendered difficult or impossible by deformities in the physical structures used in speech and sound production or by disorders affecting areas of the brain that process speech and sound.
In the United States, statistics from the early 21st century compiled by the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders revealed that approximately 5 percent of American children had detectable speech disorders by age six or seven. About 7.5 million Americans were found to be unable to use their voice normally. Disorders of articulation among young children were frequent.
Studies in Germany, Austria, and other central European countries suggest that the incidence and prevalence of speech disorders in these countries follow patterns similar to those observed among other Western countries. There are, however, deviations from these trends. For example, the incidence of cleft palate is very high among Native Americans, while it is much lower among blacks than in whites. Studies of stuttering that have focused on specific populations, including Americans, Europeans, and Africans, have indicated that the prevalence of the disorder among these populations is highly variable. However, generalization of the data suggests that roughly 2.5 percent of children under age five are affected by stuttering. For some speech disorders, reliable data on global prevalence and distribution are lacking.
In accordance with physiological considerations, disorders of communication are first classified into disorders of voice and phonic respiration, disorders of articulated speech, and disorders of language. It has been known for a long time that the majority of communication disorders are not caused by local lesions of the teeth, tongue, vocal cords, or regulating brain centres. Since these predominant disorders of voice and speech develop from derangements of the underlying physiological functions of breathing, use of the voice, speaking habits, or emotional disorders, this group has been labeled as functional. The remainder of the communication disorders with clearly recognizable structural abnormalities in the total speech mechanism has been labeled organic.
While this empirical grouping has certain implications for the selection of the appropriate treatment, it is not satisfactory because organic structure and living function can never be separated. Certain functional disorders of the voice caused by its habitual abuse may very well lead to secondary structural changes, such as the growths (polyps and nodules) of the vocal cords, which develop as a result of vocal abuse. On the other hand, all the obviously organic and structural lesions, such as loss of the tongue from accident or surgery, will almost inevitably be followed by emotional and other psychological reactions. In this case, the functional components are of a secondary nature but to a great extent will influence the total picture of disturbance, including the patient’s ability to adjust to the limitation, to relearn a new mode of appropriate function, and to make the best of his or her condition.
Within these major groups, the various types of communication disorders have for a long time, and in most parts of the world, been described by the listener’s perceptual impression. Most languages employ specific words for the various types of abnormal speech, such as stuttering, stammering, cluttering, mumbling, lisping, whispering, and many others. The problem with such subjective and symptomatic labels is the fact that they try to define the final, audible result, the recognizable phenomenon, and not by any means the underlying basis. This general human tendency to describe disorders of communication by what the listener hears is analogous to the attempts of early medicine to classify diseases by the patient’s symptoms that the diagnosing physician could see or hear or feel or perhaps smell. Before the great discoveries of the 19th century had erected a logical basis for medical pathology, the various diseases were classified as numerous types of fevers, congestions, and dyscrasias. Thus, malaria was originally thought to be caused by the evil emanations (miasma) of the bad air (mal aria) near swamps until it was recognized to be caused by a blood parasite transmitted by the mosquito.
The various approaches of medical, psychiatric, psychological, educational, behavioral, and other schools of speech pathology have made great advances in the recent past and better systems of classification continue to be proposed. They aim at grouping the observable symptoms of speech disorders according to the underlying origins instead of the listener’s subjective impressions. While this is relatively easy in the case of language loss from, for example, a brain stroke because the destroyed brain areas can be identified at autopsy, it is more difficult in the case of the large group of so-called functional speech disorders for two reasons: first, they are definitely not caused by gross, easily visible organic lesions, and, second, many functional disorders are outgrown through maturation or appropriate learning (laboratory study of the involved tissues in such cases would reveal no detectable lesions). It is hoped that refined methods of study in the areas of both “functional” psychology and “organic” neurophysiology will eventually reveal the structural bases for the prevalent disorders of voice and speech.
The selection of methods in the medical treatment or educational rehabilitation of communication disorders depends primarily on the underlying basis for the disturbance. Any case of chronic hoarseness should be evaluated first by a laryngologist to establish a precise diagnosis. This is particularly important in the older age groups in which an incipient laryngeal cancer is often overlooked because the patient does not pay attention to his or her deteriorating voice. The prognosis of all cancers becomes rapidly poorer the longer the disease remains unrecognized. As soon as disease of the larynx is excluded as a cause of the vocal complaint, vocal rehabilitation by a competent speech pathologist should be considered.
Malformations, diseases, or injuries of the peripheral speech mechanism are treated by appropriate specialists. The plastic surgeon repairs a cleft of the palate. The neurologist and internist treat the stroke patient until he or she has recovered sufficiently to be referred for reeducation of language abilities. The pediatrician treats the child with intellectual disability, while the geneticist counsels the family regarding the possible inheritance of the disorder and its future avoidance. Deafness or severe hearing loss in early childhood is a typical cause for severe delay of language development and should be promptly recognized through appropriate examination by the ear surgeon (otologist) and hearing specialist (audiologist). Cases of childhood autism (withdrawal, severe eccentricities) or early schizophrenia are recognized with increasing frequency by speech pathologists, child psychiatrists, pediatricians, and clinical psychologists. This multitude of various professional interests in the recognition and rehabilitation of such exceptional children is well served by the coordination of these efforts in the modern team approach. But again, the largest group of disorders of voice and speech has causes other than these grossly organic lesions. They belong within the province of speech rehabilitation by experts in speech pathology and other functional practitioners.
In the 21st century, researchers from diverse fields, including neuroscience, bioengineering, and linguistics, worked to develop state-of-the-art devices capable of generating a synthetic voice controlled by activity in the speech centres of a person’s brain. Part of this research entailed mapping sound produced by the voice of healthy individuals to movements of the vocal tract, which allowed for the subsequent development of algorithms that associate brain activity generated during speech with specific vocal tract movements. Those movements could then be used to produce a synthetic version of an individual’s voice. In an early trial, one such neural decoder successfully generated understandable sentences that had been silently mimed by a person with intact speech.
That humankind has been troubled by speech afflictions since the beginning of recorded history can be gleaned from numerous remarks in the books of the Bible. Further, many scientific and medical writers from the time of antiquity to the Middle Ages reported observations of speech and voice disorders. The recommended remedies merely reflected the inadequacies of the philosophical or empirical notions of their times. Scientifically oriented speech pathology originated in Germany during the latter part of the 19th century, following closely the development of otolaryngology. Three names stand out in this respect: Carl Ludwig Merkel (Anthropophonik; 1857), Adolph Kussmaul (The Disorders of Speech; 1877), and Hermann Gutzmann, Sr., who became the first professor of speech pathology at the University of Berlin Medical School around 1900.
During the same time, the new science of experimental phonetics was developed by Jean-Pierre Rousselot in Paris, who promptly recognized the great contributions that experimental phonetics could make to the study of normal and disturbed speech. This close collaboration of medical speech pathology with experimental phonetics has remained typical for the European continent where speech correction is customarily carried out under the direction of physicians in the ear, nose, and throat departments of the university hospitals. The designation of speech and voice pathology as logopedics and phoniatrics with its medical orientation subsequently reached many other civilized nations, notably in Japan and on the South American continent. The national organizations in most of these areas are now represented in the International Association of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, which was founded in Vienna in 1924.
The evolution of speech correction in the Anglo-Saxon countries followed a different trend. Although the United Kingdom has had a long tradition in general and experimental phonetics, its College of Speech Therapists was organized as an examining and supervisory body in 1945. Similar organizations followed in other areas of the British Commonwealth.
American speech pathology elected a different way. The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), founded in 1925 in New York City as the American Academy of Speech Correction, became the organizing, examining, and supervisory body for a rapidly growing membership, which surpassed 130,000 by 2008. Many colleges and universities in the United States are accredited by ASHA and offer degrees in speech pathology and audiology, some including work at the doctoral level. The large majority of ASHA members work as speech clinicians. A smaller number with master’s degrees and a still smaller number with doctoral degrees staff clinics that deal with communication disorders and that are usually affiliated with hospitals, colleges, universities, and occasionally with civic organizations.
Russian speech correction originally followed the developments of European logopedics and phoniatrics. One facet of early speech pathology research in Russia was its emphasis on Pavlovian theory (conditioning and retraining) and intensive use of neuropsychiatric methods, including pharmacology, sleep therapy, and other intensive treatment programs during hospitalization. Similar trends operate in the eastern European countries, such as in the Czech Republic, where the first independent medical department of logopedics and phoniatrics was organized at the Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Prague.
