Sperm competition,  a special form of mating competition that occurs in sexual species when females accept multiple mating partners over a relatively short period of time. The potential for overlap between the sperm of different males within the female has resulted in a diversity of behavioral adaptations and bizarre strategies for maximizing paternity.
Sperm competition is thought to be the primary reason why males offer nuptial gifts (such as food) to females or allow females to cannibalize them. Such nuptial gifts are best thought of as mating effort (that is, effort directed at increasing the number of offspring a male sires), because they are usually not available at the time of birth or hatching to benefit the offspring sired by the male presenting the gift. The male’s paternity and the number of sperm he transfers often correlate with the size of the donation, suggesting that the donation functions to increase the number of offspring he sires.
Sperm competition favours the evolution of paternity guards or mechanisms that reduce the impact of the mating efforts of competitors. In many animals, sperm competition results in mate-guarding behaviour, whereby males remain near the female following mating. This behaviour is designed to keep additional mates away from the female prior to the fertilization of her eggs. For example, in the cobalt milkweed beetle (Chrysochus cobaltinus), the male rides on the back of the female for several hours. By engaging in this behaviour, the male sacrifices time he could use to locate a new mate in favour of preventing her from copulating with other males before she can lay her eggs. In addition, male damselflies and dragonflies (order Odonata) use their genitalia to physically remove or compact the sperm of the female’s prior mates before they inseminate her with their own sperm.
Examples of sperm competition in polygynandrous vertebrates are found in dunnocks (Prunella modularis) and acorn woodpeckers (Melanerpes formicivorus). In dunnocks, a common English backyard bird, males peck at the female’s cloaca. This activity causes her to release a droplet of semen containing the sperm of prior mates before a new male begins to mate with her. In acorn woodpeckers, the threat to a male’s paternity comes from other males within the same breeding group. As a result, males spend virtually all their time within a few metres of fertile females, guarding them from other breeding males in the group. Birdsong and territorial behaviour have also been shown to function as paternity protection, although these behaviours have other primary functions.
