Survival of the fittest,  term made famous in the fifth edition (published in 1869) of On the Origin of Species by British naturalist Charles Darwin, which suggested that organisms best adjusted to their environment are the most successful in surviving and reproducing. Darwin borrowed the term from English sociologist and philosopher Herbert Spencer, who first used it in his 1864 book Principles of Biology. (Spencer came up with the phrase only after reading Darwin’s work.)
Darwin did not consider the process of evolution as the survival of the fittest; he regarded it as survival of the fitter, because the “struggle for existence” (a term he took from English economist and demographer Thomas Malthus) is relative and thus not absolute. Instead, the winners with respect to species within ecosystems could become losers with a change of circumstances. For example, fossil evidence supports the notion that the mammoth (Mammuthus) was more fit during the most recent ice age (which ended roughly 11,700 years ago), but it became less fit as humans hunted it and the world’s climate warmed; fossil evidence suggests that the mammoth succumbed to extinction a few thousand years later.
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection entailed three crucial elements: variation, reproduction, and heritability. Variations in the physical features of organisms that tend to benefit an individual (or a species) in the struggle for existence are preserved and passed on (or selected), because the individuals (or species) that have them tend to survive. The success or failure of a given variation is not known when it emerges; it is known only retrospectively, after organisms that possess it either grow and mature and pass it to their own offspring or fail to mature and reproduce.
Importantly, Darwin was influenced by the thinking of English physicist and mathematician Isaac Newton, whose system emphasized experimentation, mathematics, and logic over subjective sense experience. During Darwin’s time, his evolutionary theory was an attempt to construct a similar system for the living world, a frontier not yet crossed in the biological sciences.
Some philosophers and scientists have suggested that the notion of survival of the fittest is an example of circular reasoning—that is, a tautology (a statement framed in such a way that it cannot be falsified without inconsistency). In tautologies, any true statements that follow are a matter of definition. Indeed, describing those that survive as the fittest is similar to stating that those that survive survive. British philosopher Karl Popper considered “survival of the fittest” self-evident at first; however, he changed his mind after realizing that Darwin posited variation axiomatically; that is, Darwin noted that all individuals did not start with the same set of characters (or traits). Therefore, the forces affecting survival did not weigh on individuals and species equally; there were always variations, some of which would prove favourable and confer fitness over others.
Darwin was also influenced by Scottish philosopher Adam Smith, whose An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations was published in 1776. In this work, Smith venerated self-interest: “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.” Such self-interest was based on a philosophical view of the world that posited that only individuals, and not groups, were the important elements. In so doing, Smith was aligning himself with a nominalist worldview (which held that reality is only made up of concrete and individual items). According to Smith, what he termed the “invisible hand”—a metaphor in which beneficial social and economic outcomes arose from the accumulated self-interested actions of individuals—would settle matters between people, bringing a sense of balance to their performance. Smith’s worldview was associated with the doctrine of laissez-faire economics (the policy of minimum governmental interference in the economic affairs of individuals and society), and it is reflected in Darwin’s own account of evolution by natural selection:
The logic of survival of the fittest and natural selection was thought to be transferable to humanity. Within the context of the ascendancy of Victorian England (1820–1914), a perspective arose that the more intelligent would rule the less intelligent, or those who were less fit. To realize this perspective, Darwin’s cousin, British scientist Francis Galton, who coined the term eugenics (derived from the Greek for “well-born”), established the Eugenics Education Society of London in 1907. Galton, along with many others among the educated classes, hoped to actively discourage the overbreeding of the less fit and so preserve what was best in Victorian society.
As it related to the concept of survival of the fittest, eugenics was divided into positive and negative forms, with positive eugenics actively encouraging good breeding and negative eugenics preventing bad breeding. A pertinent example of negative eugenics appeared in the work of American psychologist Robert Yerkes. During World War I Yerkes analyzed the intelligence of U.S. Army recruits, and he concluded that heritable traits accounted for differences in intelligence between races, despite his use of culturally biased intelligence tests. U.S. Pres. Calvin Coolidge, who was influenced by Yerkes’s findings, signed the 1924 Immigration Act, a law that prevented people from immigrating to the United States by virtue of their nationality or race. In 1907 Indiana became the first U.S. state to pass laws that allowed for compulsory sterilization of those who had been classified as “unfit.” More than 29 other states would follow, passing their own compulsory sterilization laws; however, the eugenics movement in the U.S. declined in popularity after the 1920s.
The eugenics movement burgeoned in Europe during the 1920s and 1930s. German politician Adolf Hitler wrote, in Mein Kampf (1925), that “positive steps should be taken to encourage the flourishing of the fitter, because the system itself often worked against them.” In this passage Hitler appears to twist the tenets of Darwinism to support his fascist worldview. Eugenics lost much of its appeal in Europe and elsewhere after World War II, due to its association with Nazi Germany.
