Uterus, also called womb,  an inverted pear-shaped muscular organ of the female reproductive system, located between the bladder and the rectum. It functions to nourish and house a fertilized egg until the fetus, or offspring, is ready to be delivered.
The uterus has four major regions: the fundus is the broad curved upper area in which the fallopian tubes connect to the uterus; the body, the main part of the uterus, starts directly below the level of the fallopian tubes and continues downward until the uterine walls and cavity begin to narrow; the isthmus is the lower, narrow neck region; and the lowest section, the cervix, extends downward from the isthmus until it opens into the vagina. The uterus is 6 to 8 cm (2.4 to 3.1 inches) long; its wall thickness is approximately 2 to 3 cm (0.8 to 1.2 inches). The width of the organ varies; it is generally about 6 cm wide at the fundus and only half this distance at the isthmus. The uterine cavity opens into the vaginal cavity, and the two make up what is commonly known as the birth canal.
Lining the uterine cavity is a moist mucous membrane known as the endometrium. The lining changes in thickness during the menstrual cycle, being thickest during the period of egg release from the ovaries (see ovulation). If the egg is fertilized, it attaches to the thick endometrial wall of the uterus and begins developing. If the egg is unfertilized, the endometrial wall sheds its outer layer of cells; the egg and excess tissue are then passed from the body during menstrual bleeding. The endometrium also produces secretions that help keep both the egg and the sperm cells alive. The components of the endometrial fluid include water, iron, potassium, sodium, chloride, glucose (a sugar), and proteins. Glucose is a nutrient to the reproductive cells, while proteins aid with implantation of the fertilized egg. The other constituents provide a suitable environment for the egg and sperm cells.
The uterine wall is made up of three layers of muscle tissue. The muscle fibres run longitudinally, circularly, and obliquely, entwined between connective tissue of blood vessels, elastic fibres, and collagen fibres. This strong muscle wall expands and becomes thinner as a child develops inside the uterus. After birth, the expanded uterus returns to its normal size in about six to eight weeks; its dimensions, however, are about 1 cm (0.4 inch) larger in all directions than before childbearing. The uterus is also slightly heavier and the uterine cavity remains larger.
The uterus of a female child is small until puberty, when it rapidly grows to its adult size and shape. After menopause, when the female is no longer capable of having children, the uterus becomes smaller, more fibrous, and paler. Some afflictions that may affect the uterus include infections; benign and malignant tumours; malformations, such as a double uterus; and prolapse, in which part of the uterus becomes displaced and protrudes from the vaginal opening. Uterus transplantation, in which a uterus from a healthy female is transplanted into the affected woman, has been considered a potential form of treatment in extreme cases of uterine disease or absence of the uterus; the first birth of a healthy infant to a uterus transplant recipient occurred in 2014.
