Vestibular system,  apparatus of the inner ear involved in balance. The vestibular system consists of two structures of the bony labyrinth of the inner ear, the vestibule and the semicircular canals, and the structures of the membranous labyrinth contained within them.
The two membranous sacs of the vestibule, the utricle and the saccule, are known as the otolith organs. Because they respond to gravitational forces, they are also called gravity receptors. Each sac has on its inner surface a single patch of sensory cells called a macula, which monitors the position of the head relative to the vertical. Each macula consists of neuroepithelium, which is made up of supporting cells and sensory cells, as well as a basement membrane, nerve fibres, nerve endings, and underlying connective tissue. The sensory cells are called hair cells because of the hairlike cilia—stiff nonmotile stereocilia and flexible motile kinocilia—that project from their apical ends. The nerve fibres are from the superior, or vestibular, division of the vestibulocochlear nerve.
Each of the hair cells of the vestibular organs is topped by a hair bundle, which consists of about 100 fine nonmotile stereocilia of graded lengths and a single motile kinocilium. The single kinocilium, which is larger and longer than the stereocilia, rises from a noncuticular area of the cell membrane at one side of the cuticular plate. The longest stereocilia are those closest to the kinocilium. Minute filamentous strands link the tips and shafts of neighbouring stereocilia to one another. When the hair bundles are deflected—e.g., because of a tilt of the head—the hair cells are stimulated to alter the rate of the nerve impulses that they are constantly sending via the vestibular nerve fibres to the brainstem. Covering the entire macula is a delicate acellular structure, the otolithic, or statolithic, membrane. This membrane is sometimes described as gelatinous, although it has a fibrillar pattern. The surface of the membrane is covered by a blanket of rhombohedral crystals, referred to as otoconia or statoconia, which consist of calcium carbonate in the form of calcite. These crystalline particles, which range in length from 1 to 20 m (1 m = 0.000039 inch), are much denser than the membrane and thus add considerable mass to it.
The three semicircular canals of the bony labyrinth are designated according to their position: superior, horizontal, and posterior. The superior and posterior canals are in diagonal vertical planes that intersect at right angles. Each canal has an expanded end, the ampulla, which opens into the vestibule. The ampullae of the horizontal and superior canals lie close together, just above the oval window, but the ampulla of the posterior canal opens on the opposite side of the vestibule. The other ends of the superior and posterior canals join to form a common stem, or crus, which also opens into the vestibule. One end of the horizontal canal opens into the vestibule. Thus, the vestibule completes the circle for each of the semicircular canals.
Each membranous ampulla contains a saddle-shaped ridge of tissue called the crista, the sensory end organ that extends across it from side to side. The crista is covered by neuroepithelium, with hair cells and supporting cells. From this ridge rises a gelatinous structure, the cupula, which divides the interior of the ampulla into two approximately equal parts. The hair cells of the cristae have hair bundles projecting from their apices. The kinocilium and the longest stereocilia extend far up into the substance of the cupula, occupying fine parallel channels. Thus, the cupula is attached at its base to the crista but is free to incline toward or away from the utricle. The tufts of cilia move with the cupula and, depending on the direction of their bending, cause an increase or a decrease in the rate of nerve impulse discharges carried by the vestibular nerve fibres to the brainstem.
