As rock and roll made its way to continental Europe in the late 1950s, several nightclub owners in the red-light district of Hamburg, West Germany—the Reeperbahn, named for the street that was its main artery—decided that the new music should supplant the jazz they had been featuring. British sailors had told Bruno Koschmider, owner of the Kaiserkeller, about the music scene in London, and after visiting England he decided to import some musicians, whom he christened the Jets. Their guitarist, Tony Sheridan, became the Reeperbahn’s first rock star and was soon lured away by a rival club, the Top Ten. Undaunted, Koschmider took advantage of the direct ship route to Liverpool to bring over inexpensive talent from that city, including Gerry and the Pacemakers, the Swinging Blue Jeans, Billy J. Kramer, the Searchers, and, most famously, the Beatles, whose first recording was as Tony Sheridan’s backing group on a single for the German Polydor label.
As other clubs along the street, including the Star-Club, which proved to be the longest lasting, began booking rock-and-roll bands, the Reeperbahn became a magnet for British groups, who were housed in slum apartments, fed amphetamines to keep them going, and made to play back-breaking schedules. Besides drugs, violence was rife in the clubs, and waiters carried blackjacks and tear-gas pistols, which were also issued to some bands. Exhausting though the work was, the seemingly endless sets transformed the groups into tight musical units.
Furthermore, there was a group of young German intellectuals called “Exis” (from existentialists) who began frequenting the clubs. The most prominent were artists Klaus Voorman and his girlfriend Astrid Kirchherr, who had an affair with the Beatles’ Stu Sutcliffe, took the first photos of the band, and designed their famous haircuts. Several figures from this group of young people later were instrumental in the beginnings of German rock. The Reeperbahn continued to be a laboratory for British groups until the mid-1960s; at that point British bands were making enough money at home not to have to endure the horrible working conditions in the Reeperbahn, and German bands had become good enough for the crowds frequenting the clubs.
