Frisian,  people of western Europe whose name survives in that of the mainland province of Friesland and in that of the Frisian Islands off the coast of the Netherlands but
who once occupied a much more extensive area.
In prehistoric times the Frisians inhabited the coastal regions
from the mouth of the Rhine at Katwijk (north of The Hague) to the mouth of the Ems. Much of the land then was covered by lakes, estuaries, and swamps and exposed to the incursions of the sea, and the inhabitants lived mostly on terpen, or man-made mounds. Slowly the Frisians brought the lower-lying land under cultivation and protected themselves against the sea by building more terpen (dikes were not practicable). Most of these were in the modern provinces of Friesland and Groningen; the east bank of the Rhine itself was almost uninhabited. Excavations in the terpen have thrown some light on Frisian life in the centuries before the Romans came.
The Roman general Nero Claudius Drusus encountered the Frisians after his crossing of the Rhine from the south in 12 bce. He then made them tributary to Rome. The fact that they supplied oxhide for the Roman army suggests considerable cattle raising. In 28 ce the Frisians revolted and temporarily freed themselves from Roman rule, but in 47 ce they were once more made tributary by Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo. Thereafter they supplied soldiery for the Roman armies. They took part in the Batavian revolt of 69–70 ce, but relations with the Roman authority were soon restored, and Frisians continued to serve in the Roman legions in many places, including Britain (inscriptions from the 2nd and 3rd centuries for instance at Appleby and at Watermore). Pottery from Trier and from southern Gaul and imported bronzes found in Frisia provide clear evidence of the trade that the Romans brought in return for exports of cattle. This trade developed gradually in the 2nd and 3rd centuries but then declined, though during the 4th and 5th centuries commercial relations with Cologne and the Rhine province still existed, as coins found in Frisia show. Even so, there was little fusion between the Frisian and the Roman cultures, and the native ways held. Frisia had begun to show that spirit of independence which still survives in cultural, social, and political matters.
By the end of the 5th century, Roman rule had disappeared and
migrations were changing the face of western Europe. Between
450 and 500 the Angles and Saxons, on their way from the Elbe River to Britain, may well have invaded Frisia and spent some time there. Some of them may have settled permanently in Frisia, while a number of Frisians may have gone on to Britain with the majority of the newcomers. Some finds suggest that after about 500 the Frisians became somewhat mixed with Anglo-Saxon elements and that there was some blending of cultures (language, ceramics, architecture).
After about 600, Frankish influences also made themselves felt.
The Franks pushed forward to the north and became neighbours of the Frisians, who in the meantime had expanded outside the coastal belt proper. This larger region, Frisia Magna (up to the lower reaches of the Rhine) was so named because its inhabitants were mainly Frisians from the coast. Its economy included not only agriculture and cattle breeding but also a textile industry. Dorestad (southeast of Utrecht) was the commercial centre. The Frisians, a seafaring people, also traded by river with the regions of the Rhine and of the Moselle and later with the north of France.
The Franks invaded the southern borderland of Frisia Magna
and occupied the remains of the Roman fort of Trajectum ad
Rhenum (Utrecht) and the trading station of Dorestad about 600.
About 40 years later the Frisians recovered this area and penetrated
into the region between the Rhine and the Meuse; in Dorestad
they even minted coins. In 689, however, the Frisian kingRadbod was dislodged from Dorestad and Trajectum by the Frankish
leader Pippin II, who wanted to protect both the Frankish trade on the Rhine and the Christian missions.
Anglo-Saxon missionaries now began to convert the Frisians to Christianity: Willibrord arrived with his followers at Utrecht in 690. In the 8th century came Boniface (who was to be martyred near Dokkum in 754), and the Frisian Liudger continued the work. Utrecht was the centre of this activity, but the ill will of the Frisian kings partly counteracted its effect.
In 734 the Frankish ruler Charles Martel defeated the Frisians and drove them back to the north, thus dissolving Frisia Magna. Charlemagne finally subdued the Frisians, and after this they were converted permanently to Christianity. When the Saxon revolts had been crushed, peace reigned in Frisia. The national laws were codified (Lex Frisionum, 802 ce). Norse invasions temporarily disturbed this peace in the 9th century.
Frisia was little affected by the partition of the Carolingian empire. From 925 the lands occupied by Frisians belonged to the German kingdom. The people’s subsequent history, however, is that of the three regions into which the country was divided: (1) West Frisia, from the mouth of the Rhine to the Vlie and Lake Flevo; (2) Middle Frisia, from the Vlie to Lauwers; and (3) East Frisia, from Lauwers to the Jade estuary, where the region east of the Ems was penetrated by Frisians as colonists between 600 and 1200. The boundary between West and Middle Frisia was soon formed by the floods of Lake Flevo, which developed into the Zuiderzee.
West Frisia fell to the counts of Holland, who occupied first the south and the coastal area and, after 1250, the northeastern part. In East Frisia the city of Groningen, with its surrounding country, was ruled by the bishop of Utrecht, and part of the district between the Ems and the Jade became a countship (under the Cirksena family from 1454 to 1744, when it passed to the kingdom of Prussia). Middle Frisia kept itself free of overlords, whether native or foreign, except for short periods, until the end of the Middle Ages.
The Middle Frisians repeatedly expelled the counts of Holland, although they remained “immediate” vassals of the Holy Roman emperor throughout the Middle Ages. Feudalism was never accepted there, and this gave rise to the idea of Frisian liberties. These found expression in the so-called Privilege of Freedom, allegedly granted by Charlemagne but in fact a forgery, from the second half of the 13th century.
These Frisians settled all affairs themselves, keeping
legislation, administration, and the judiciary in their own hands
and themselves maintaining their dikes, roads, and canals. The
Union of the Upstalbeam, by which they consolidated themselves
politically, included some of the East Frisians. This degree of
liberty was rare in medieval Europe; parallels are found only in the Swiss confederacy and in the administration of Dithmarschen.
As late as 1457 the emperor Frederick III acknowledged the "immediate" status of the Frisians, but in 1498 the emperor Maximilian I presented Frisia to Albert, duke of Saxony, with the title gubernator in Frisia. The Saxon dukes, however, could not hold their own; the Frisians, helped by Charles of Gelders, ousted them. In 1524 the Frisian lands between Lauwers and the Zuiderzee fell to the emperor Charles V. Thenceforth they were joined to the Burgundian portion of the Habsburg heritage. Charles was the
first foreign ruler to bring the free Frisians a central administration that
they accepted.
Friesland adopted the new doctrines at the Reformation and participated in the revolt of the northern Netherlands against Philip II of Spain. It thus became a province of the republic of the Netherlands, as constituted by the Union of Utrecht (1579). A junior branch of the house of Nassau filled the office of stadtholder. In 1815 Friesland was absorbed into the kingdom of the Netherlands.
The Frisian language, which has many dialects, is taught in the schools in Friesland. It is acknowledged as an official language in Friesland, but it is not legally codified as such by the Dutch government. Literary and scientific works are written in it, and there is a Frisian academy (Fryske Akademy) in Leeuwarden. In East and North Frisia the language has been largely supplanted by German. In the early 21st century, there were approximately 470,000 Frisian speakers worldwide.
