Iberian, Spanish Ibero,  one of a prehistoric people of southern and eastern Spain who later gave their name to the whole peninsula. The waves of migrating Celtic peoples from the 8th to 6th century bc onward settled heavily in northern and central Spain, penetrated Portugal and Galicia, but left the indigenous Bronze Age Iberian people of the south and east intact. Greek geographers give the name Iberian, probably connected with that of the Ebro (Iberus) River, to tribes settled on the southeastern coast, but, by the time of the Greek historian Herodotus (mid-5th century bc), it applied to all the peoples between the Ebro and Huelva rivers, who were probably linguistically connected and whose material culture was distinct from that of the north and west. There were, however, areas of overlap between the Iberian and Celtic peoples, as in the Celtiberian tribes of the northeastern Meseta Central and in Catalonia and Aragon.
Of the Iberian tribes mentioned by classical authors, the Bastetani were territorially the most important and occupied the Almería region and mountainous Granada region. The tribes to the west of the Bastetani are usually grouped together as “Tartessian,” after the name Tartessos given to the region by the Greeks. The Turdetani of the Guadalquivir River valley were the most powerful of this group. Culturally the tribes of the northeast and of the Valencian coast were greatly influenced by the Greek settlements at Emporion (modern Ampurias) and in the Alicante region, those of the southeast by influences from the Phoenician trading colonies at Malaca (Málaga), Sexi (Almuñéca), and Abdera (Adra), which later passed to the Carthaginians.
On the east coast the Iberian tribes appear to have been grouped around independent city-states. In the south there were monarchies, and the treasure of El Carambolo, near Sevilla (Seville), has been thought to be that of a ruler of Tartessos. Religious sanctuaries have yielded bronzes and terra-cotta figures, especially in mountainous areas. There is a wide range of ceramics in the distinctive Iberian styles. Exported pottery has been found in southern France, Sardinia, Sicily, and Africa; and Greek imports were frequent. The splendid La dama de Elche (“The Lady of Elche”), a bust with characteristic headdress and ornaments, also shows classical influence. The Iberian economy had a rich agriculture and mining and metallurgy.
The Iberian language, a non-Indo-European tongue, continued to be spoken into early Roman times. Along the east coast it was written in Iberian script, a system of 28 syllabic and alphabetic characters, some derived from Greek and Phoenician systems but most of unknown origin. Many inscriptions in the script survive. Few words, however, except place-names on the coinage struck by many cities in the 3rd century bc, can be understood. The Iberians retained their writing system until the Roman conquest, when the Latin alphabet came into use. Although the modern Basque language was formerly thought to be the descendant of Iberian, many scholars now believe the two languages to be separate.
