Rusyn, Rusyn ruskyi, also called Ruthenian, Carpatho-Rusyn, Lemko, or Rusnak,  any of several East Slavic peoples (modern-day Belarusians, Ukrainians, and Carpatho-Rusyns) and their languages. The name Rusyn is derived from Rus (Ruthenia), the name of the territory that they inhabited. The name Ruthenian derives from the Latin Ruthenus (singular), a term found in medieval sources to describe the Slavic inhabitants of Eastern Christian religion (Orthodox and Greek Catholics) living in the grand duchy of Lithuania and, after 1569, in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Rusyn-inhabited territories in those states had from the 10th to the 14th century belonged to several principalities referred to collectively as Kievan Rus. The Latin term Ruthenus (plural Rutheni) is the equivalent of the Slavic Rusyn (plural Rusyny), meaning “an inhabitant of the land of Rus.”
Rusyn (Ruthenian) refers as well to language. Ruthenian was the term used to describe the written medium (initially based on spoken Belarusian) that functioned as the official or chancellery language of the grand duchy of Lithuania and to refer to the spoken, or simple (prosta), language of the duchy’s East Slavic inhabitants (present-day Belarusians and Ukrainians). Ruthenian (German: Ruthenisch; Hungarian: rutén) was also the official designation for the spoken and written language of the East Slavs (present-day Ukrainians and Carpatho-Rusyns) living in the Habsburg-ruled Austrian Empire. Today the name Rusyn refers to the spoken language and variants of a literary language codified in the 20th century for Carpatho-Rusyns living in Ukraine (Transcarpathia), Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Serbia (the Vojvodina).
Following the partitions of Poland-Lithuania in the late 18th century, Rusyn-inhabited lands were divided between the Russian Empire (present-day Belarus and much of Ukraine) and the Austrian, later Austro-Hungarian, Empire (present-day western Ukraine, southeastern Poland, and northeastern Slovakia). In the course of the “long” 19th century (1780s–1914), the name Ruthenian fell out of use in the Russian Empire and was replaced by either White Russian or Little Russian. The term Ruthenian continued to be used, however, in the Austro-Hungarian Empire as the official designation (German: Ruthenen; Hungarian: ruténok) for the East Slavic inhabitants living in that state’s provinces of Galicia and Bukovina and the northeastern counties of Hungary. A large-scale immigration from Austria-Hungary to North America during the half century before World War I saw the introduction of the term Ruthenian to describe those newcomers in American and Canadian census reports.
By the outset of the 20th century, the Rusyns in the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires (and in the North American diaspora) were gradually becoming differentiated into Belarusians, Ukrainians, and Carpatho-Rusyns. At the close of World War I, historic Rusyn-inhabited lands were divided between the Soviet Union (the Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic [S.S.R.] and the Ukrainian S.S.R.), Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia. In Czechoslovakia, Ruthenian-Rusyn survived as the official designation of a people, Carpatho-Rusyns (Czech: Karpatští Rusíni), who lived in the far eastern part of that country—that is, in what is now northeastern Slovakia and in a province called Subcarpathian Rus, or the Subcarpathian Rusyn Land (Czech: Podkarpatská Rus; Země podkarpatoruská).
Subcarpathian Rus was endowed with autonomous status approved at the Paris Peace Conference and inscribed in two international treaties (St. Germain [1919]; Trianon [1920]) and in Czechoslovakia’s constitution (1921). Rusyn became alongside Czech an official language of the province. Yet, despite international treaties and constitutional guarantees, Subcarpathian Rus did not acquire full autonomous status until October 1938. Pressured by Nazi Germany and its ally Hungary, Czechoslovakia was forced to cede to those two countries parts of its territory until it ceased to exist entirely in March 1939. During Czechoslovakia’s last months, autonomous Subcarpathian Rus (also known at the time as Carpatho-Ukraine) acquired its own elected diet, which on the last day of Czechoslovakia’s existence (March 15, 1939) symbolically declared its independence as the “republic for a day.”
Hungary annexed Subcarpathian Rus in March 1939, while the Carpatho-Rusyn minority in Slovakia remained in that new state, which, like Hungary, was allied with Nazi Germany. Hungary never implemented the autonomy that it promised, but it did recognize what were called Hungarian Ruthenians (Uhro-Rusyns). At the same time, Rusyn (ruskyi) was declared the official language alongside Hungarian in the region.
Following the arrival of Soviet armies in the fall of 1944, Hungarian rule was replaced by a transitional local government (National Council of Transcarpathian Ukraine), which rejected the return to Czechoslovak rule and instead fulfilled Joseph Stalin’s desire to see the region annexed to the Soviet Union. In June 1945 Subcarpathian Rus was ceded by Czechoslovakia to the Soviet Union and became the Transcarpathian oblast (region) of the Ukrainian S.S.R. The designations Rusyn and Carpatho-Rusyn were banned, and the local East Slavic inhabitants and their language were declared to be Ukrainian. Soviet policy was followed in neighbouring communist Czechoslovakia and Poland, where the Carpatho-Rusyn inhabitants (Lemko Rusyns in the case of Poland) were henceforth officially designated Ukrainians. Hence, during the post-World War II communist era in central and eastern Europe (1945–89), the ethnonym Rusyn lived on only among the Carpathian diaspora in Serbia’s Vojvodina and Croatia’s Srem—regions of Yugoslavia where Rusyns (locally known as Rusnaks) were designated an official nationality—and among the large immigrant communities in the United States.
With the collapse of communist rule (1989) in central and eastern Europe, a Carpatho-Rusyn revival took place during which national activists called for the recognition of Rusyns as a distinct nationality with the right to use their language in schools, the media, cultural life, and civic affairs. An important goal of the revival was to codify a modern Rusyn literary language, something that occurred in Serbia as early as 1923 and was achieved in 1995 in Slovakia and has since happened in Poland (2000) and Ukraine (2014).
The status of Rusyns (Carpatho-Rusyns) varies from country to country. Since the 1990s, Slovakia, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Serbia, Croatia, and the Czech Republic have recognized Rusyns as a distinct national minority eligible for state support for educational and cultural activity. Ukraine has been reluctant to follow the lead of its western neighbours, although in March 2007 the regional assembly in the Transcarpathian oblast (Zakarpattya) recognized Rusyns as a distinct nationality, and the central government in Ukraine adopted a law (August 2012) that lists Rusyn (rusynska) as one of the country’s regional languages.
No country contains a distinct administrative entity called Ruthenia (Carpathian Rus). Two countries, however, do provide a form of autonomy. Since 1993 Hungary has allowed self-government for individual communities (villages as well as districts in cities) that have a certain percentage of inhabitants of a given nationality other than Hungarian. At present the Rusyn Minority Self-Government in Hungary consists of 72 communities, mostly in the northeastern part of the country and in the centrally located capital city of Budapest and surrounding county of Pest. Budapest is also the seat of the statewide Administration for Rusyn Self-Government. Since 2002 the province of Vojvodina in Serbia has provided for elected councils, among which is the National Council of the Rusyn National Minority. It determines policy and the distribution of state funds for cultural and civic activity among the Rusyns (Rusnaks) of that province.
It is generally difficult to determine the number of people who belong to a nationality other than the official one of the state in which they live. Rusyns (Carpatho-Rusyns) are no exception, since not all countries where they live record them accurately on census reports. Informed estimates suggest that there may be as many as one million Rusyns living in their Carpathian homeland and adjacent countries. Much smaller are the numbers found in official census data from the first decade of the 21st century that are based on answers to questions of national or ethnic identity (Rusyn, Rusnak, Lemko) or mother tongue or native language: Slovakia (55,500), Serbia (14,200), Poland (10,500), Ukraine (10,100), Hungary (3,900), Croatia (2,300), Czech Republic (1,100), and Romania (250).
