John Hay Whitney, byname Jock Whitney,  (born August 17, 1904, Ellsworth, Maine, U.S.—died February 8, 1982, Manhasset, New York), American multimillionaire and sportsman who had a multifaceted career as a publisher, financier, philanthropist, and horse breeder.
Whitney was born into a prominent family; his maternal grandfather was U.S. Secretary of State John Hay, and his father’s side included some of the wealthiest individuals in the United States. After attending Groton Preparatory School and Yale University (1922–26), Whitney entered the University of Oxford, but, upon the death of his father in 1927, he returned to manage the vast family fortune. Meanwhile, he had become a keen sportsman and an internationally ranked polo player, joining the renowned Greentree polo team in 1924 and remaining an active player until the team broke up in 1940. He eventually took a leading role in many horse-breeding and racing organizations, and his own stables, Greentree, produced several notable winning racehorses.
Whitney was also interested in the arts. He invested in Broadway plays, including the long-running hit Life with Father; ventured into films with Pioneer Pictures, which demonstrated the value of Technicolor; and, in 1935, helped form the Selznick International Motion Picture Company, which, through Whitney’s efforts, obtained screen rights to the novel Gone with the Wind even before its publication. He served as a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City from its inception in 1931 and himself eventually formed one of the finest art collections in the United States.
With the outbreak of World War II in Europe, Whitney joined Nelson Rockefeller and others in forming what eventually became the U.S. Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. In 1942 he joined the Eighth U.S. Army Air Force as a captain in the Combat Intelligence Division and saw duty in England and the Mediterranean before being captured by the Nazis in southern France. He escaped and in 1945 was awarded the Legion of Merit. That year he became special adviser to the U.S. Department of State’s Public and Cultural Relations Division and to the International Information Service, and in 1956 he was appointed U.S. ambassador to Great Britain, where he served until 1961.
In the years after World War II, Whitney also pursued business opportunities in the communications industry, acquiring interests in numerous newspapers, television and radio stations, and magazines. His greatest disappointment was his inability to revitalize the New York Herald Tribune, which he acquired in 1958 and which he served (1961–66) as publisher and editor in chief until the newspaper folded.
As a philanthropist, in 1946 he set up the John Hay Whitney Foundation, to which he contributed $1 million annually, and in 1970 he donated $15 million to his alma mater, Yale.
