Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court held (5–4) on June 30, 2014, that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) of 1993 permits for-profit corporations that are closely held (e.g., owned by a family or family trust) to refuse, on religious grounds, to pay for legally mandated coverage of certain contraceptive drugs and devices in their employees’ health insurance plans. In so ruling, the court embraced the view that closely held for-profit corporations are legal “persons” under the RFRA and are therefore capable of exercising religion.
Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. was a consolidation of two cases, originally called Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. and Conestoga Wood Specialties Corporation v. Sebelius; the case names were changed to Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. and Conestoga Wood Specialties Corporation v. Burwell, respectively, following the confirmation of Sylvia Burwell as secretary of health and human services in June 2014. The former case arose in 2012 when David and Barbara Green, their children, and the for-profit corporations they owned—Hobby Lobby, Inc. (an arts-and-crafts retailer) and Mardel Christian & Education Stores, Inc. (a chain of Christian bookstores)—filed suit in U.S. district court, naming Kathleen Sebelius, then secretary of health and human services, and others as defendants. The individual plaintiffs (the Greens) alleged that the imminent enforcement of a regulation issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) pursuant to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010; PPACA) would infringe their rights under the RFRA, which prohibited the government from “substantially burden[ing] a person’s exercise of religion” unless “application of the burden…is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest” and is “the least restrictive means of furthering that…interest.” The Greens also contended that the regulation would violate the free-exercise clause of the First Amendment (“Congress shall make no law…prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]”).
Eventually known as the contraceptive mandate, the regulation required companies with 50 or more employees to provide insurance coverage of the 20 contraceptive methods then approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Despite scientific consensus to the contrary, the Greens believed  that four of those methods—two types of “morning after” pills and two types of intrauterine devices (IUDs)—were abortifacients (abortion inducers). On that basis they also believed that providing coverage of those methods in their employees’ health insurance plans would be tantamount to facilitating abortion and therefore inconsistent with the tenets of their Christian faith. They argued that, because HHS imposed considerable penalties (regulatory taxes of $100 per day per affected employee) on companies whose health insurance plans failed to provide “basic essential coverage,” including contraceptive coverage, the contraceptive mandate constituted a “substantial burden” on their exercise of religion—a violation of both the RFRA and the free-exercise clause.
The district court denied the Greens’ motion for a preliminary injunction against enforcement of the mandate, as did a two-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. After Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor, acting in her capacity as Circuit Justice for the Tenth Circuit, denied emergency injunctive relief, the Tenth Circuit granted the Greens’ motion for an expedited en banc hearing (before all judges of the court). In its ruling, the appeals court found that for-profit corporations “can be ‘persons’ exercising religion for purposes of the [RFRA]” and that “Free Exercise rights may extend to some for-profit organizations.” The Tenth Circuit also held that “the contraceptive-coverage requirement constitutes a substantial burden on Hobby Lobby and Mardel’s exercise of religion”; that the corporations were likely to suffer irreparable harm unless the requirement were enjoined; and that, even assuming that the government’s interest in providing women with free access to the contraceptives in question was compelling, the government had failed to show that the contraceptive mandate was the least-restrictive means of furthering that interest. It accordingly reversed the district court’s judgment and remanded the case for further consideration of the plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction.
The respondents then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case in combination with a similar appeal, Conestoga Wood Specialties Corporation v. Sebelius, involving the Mennonite owners of a woodworking company. In that case the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit had held that “for-profit, secular corporations cannot engage in religious exercise” for the purposes of the RFRA or the free-exercise clause. The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on March 25, 2014.
