Celler-Kefauver Act,  act passed by the U.S. Congress in 1950 that was intended to strengthen previously enacted antitrust legislation known as the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 through the amendment of sections and addition of special provisions. The Celler-Kefauver Act made the Clayton Act’s antimerger provisions more applicable and outlawed additional types of illegal intercorporate holdings, mergers, and acquisitions.
The original antitrust legislation in the United States, the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, was utilized heavily during the administrations of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft. The legislation prohibited any action by private firms that would prevent the regulatory action of the U.S. market system. It encouraged a market system with a significant number of rivals in each industry, ensuring market competition. Empowered by the act, the U.S. attorney general is permitted to bring lawsuits against companies suspected of monopolizing the marketplace. The act accounted for the historic antitrust cases against American Tobacco and Standard Oil, resulting in these massive companies being divided into smaller ones.
The Sherman Act was met with controversy and difficulty. Plagued with vague language, the act often proved ineffective because of loopholes, which arose from the language difficulties. For example, the act only outlaws “monopolizing” explicitly in print, but it does not ban the existence of a “monopoly,” resulting in drawn-out legal battles over the interpretation of these terms.
In 1914 the U.S. Congress attempted to ameliorate the problematic Sherman Act by amending it with the Clayton Antitrust Act. The Clayton Act, composed by U.S. Rep. Henry De Lamar Clayton from Alabama, clarified the interpretation difficulties by amending language and added specific examples of illegal actions by companies. Local targeted price-cutting, a type of price discrimination, was outlawed by the act, along with horizontal mergers and acquisitions and exclusive dealership agreements.
Soon after the enactment of the Clayton Act, the U.S. Congress established the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) with the passage of the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914. Authorized to enforce federal legislation, the FTC utilized the antitrust legislation to continue to curb and regulate monopolistic companies. The Clayton Act, however, did not solve all of the difficulties surrounding antitrust legislation. It was necessary for price-discrimination practices to be defined further by the Robinson-Patman Act of 1936 and for powers to prevent illegal mergers and acquisitions to be expanded by the Celler-Kefauver Act of 1950.
The Celler-Kefauver legislation significantly strengthened powers granted by the Clayton Act to prevent mergers that could possibly result in reduced competition. Whereas the Clayton Act only tried to prevent horizontal mergers, which is the merger of two companies that output similar products, the Celler-Kefauver Act attempted to prevent vertical and conglomerate mergers by forbidding companies from buying assets from competitors when it would result in reduced competition.
Vertical mergers, which occur when a vendor company merges with a customer company, were attacked by government officials under powers granted by the act because they are thought to create entry barriers, barring fair access of other companies with similar products to potential consumers. Conglomerate mergers, which occur when a company uses its success, resources, and money from one market to attempt to create a monopoly over another, were challenged as well. The act remains one of the strongest antitrust laws in the United States.
