Clayton Antitrust Act,  law enacted in 1914 by the United States Congress to clarify and strengthen the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890). The vague language of the latter had provided large corporations with numerous loopholes, enabling them to engage in certain restrictive business arrangements that, though not illegal per se, resulted in concentrations that had an adverse effect on competition. Thus, despite the trust-busting activities of the administrations of Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft under the Sherman Act, it appeared to a congressional committee in 1913 that big business had continued to grow bigger and that the control of money and credit in the country was such that a few men had the power to plunge the nation into a financial panic. When Pres. Woodrow Wilson asked for a drastic revision of existing antitrust legislation, Congress responded by passing the Clayton measure.
Whereas the Sherman Act only declared monopoly illegal, the Clayton Act defined as illegal certain business practices that are conducive to the formation of monopolies or that result from them. For example, specific forms of holding companies and interlocking directorates were forbidden, as were discriminatory freight (shipping) agreements and the distribution of sales territories among so-called natural competitors. Two sections of the Clayton Act were later amended by the Robinson-Patman Act (1936) and the Celler-Kefauver Act (1950) to fortify its provisions. The Robinson-Patman amendment made more enforceable Section 2, which relates to price and other forms of discrimination among customers. The Celler-Kefauver Act strengthened Section 7, prohibiting one firm from securing either the stocks or the physical assets (i.e., plant and equipment) of another firm when the acquisition would reduce competition; it also extended the coverage of antitrust laws to all forms of mergers whenever the effect would substantially lessen competition and tend to create a monopoly. Earlier legislative measures had simply restricted horizontal mergers—those involving firms that produce the same type of goods. In contrast, the Celler-Kefauver Act went further by restricting even mergers of companies in different industries (i.e., conglomerate mergers). The Clayton Act and other antitrust and consumer protection regulations are enforced by the Federal Trade Commission.
