Community property,   legal treatment of the possessions of married people as belonging to both of them. Generally, all property acquired through the efforts of either spouse during the marriage is considered community property. The law treats this property like the assets of a business partnership.
The history of marital property law shows a gradual spread of the community-property system. In ancient Rome—except for one period—wives had few property rights; whatever was theirs became their husbands’ upon marriage.
In the European Middle Ages, parts of Spain, France, and Germany had copartnership-in-acquisition systems, which are thought to have originated among the Germanic tribes and to have been carried to Spain and France by the Goths and Franks. The French and Spanish carried these practices to the Americas.
The English common law considered wives as legal extensions of their husbands and unable to own property. Various statutes in the late 19th century modified this concept in both England and the United States, and the classifications of community and separate property began to assume the features they have today.
The community-property system classifies property upon acquisition as either community or separate, irrespective of declarations of the parties—although contractual specifications between husband and wife may modify this. Separate property must be held and used exclusively by one spouse. Usually property that is acquired before marriage does not become community-owned. Most community-property statutes specify what property acquired after marriage is considered to be separate, and all the rest is classified as community.
Common sense dictates how the property is classified. For example, either spouse’s earnings belong to the community, while gifts to one spouse are considered separate property. Generally, any earnings from property (rent, interest, dividends) take their classification from the property that yields them.
Where community and separate property are blended, the whole is presumed to be community unless the great bulk of it is separate. In lawsuits over the classification of property, the presumption is in favour of the community category.
Formerly, the husband held the exclusive right to control community property, but this right has been modified by many statutes.
