Competence, also called decision-making capacity,  a person’s ability to make and communicate a decision to consent to medical treatment. Competence is thus central to the determination of consent and reflects the law’s concern with individual autonomy. A person’s decision regarding medical treatment must be respected when that person is competent to make that decision. Conversely, if a person is not competent to give informed consent, it is necessary to employ an alternative decision-making process, such as the use of a proxy, to determine whether treatment should be provided.
The test for competence is legal and not medical. While many health and medical tests are used to determine capacity (e.g., the Mini-Mental Status Examination or the MacArthur Competence Assessment Test), the ultimate issue is whether the person has competence according to the law. Therefore, a person should not automatically be presumed incompetent because he or she has a disability or a mental disorder. Rather, incompetence must be determined by examining whether a person’s illness or disability affects the ability to make a decision to the point where the person should be treated as incompetent. Similarly, a person should not be treated as incompetent because the person acts unusual or out-of-step with community expectations. Unusual or irrational behaviour may mandate an investigation into a person’s competence but is not synonymous with incapacity.
A person must be able to comprehend and retain treatment information to be competent. Common law presumes that adults are competent and that minors are incompetent (although in some jurisdictions the age of competence to consent to medical treatment has been lowered). Both presumptions can be rebutted by testing a person’s competence, which reflects a concern with the patient’s level of understanding.
There are two main issues in competency tests. The first is what sort of information must be comprehended by the patient. Opinions differ about whether the information should be just the basic facts about treatment or should be more detailed in line with the doctrine of informed consent. British commentators and courts have usually required only that the patient understand very basic information about the treatment. In contrast, American commentators and courts have required that the patient understand not only the broad nature and effects of treatment but also the benefits and risk of the treatment, of alternative treatments, and of no treatment.
The second issue concerns the type of understanding that is required of the person. Some commentators require an actual understanding of the treatment information, but others require a general ability to understand the treatment being offered. The reason for adopting an “actual understanding” standard is that it focuses on the treatment problem faced by the person. On the other hand, the actual understanding approach is open to abuse in that a medical professional may withhold information and then claim that the person does not understand what is being proposed. An “ability to understand” approach prevents that abuse because it does not depend on the person’s possessing specific understanding of the treatment being offered. In practice, courts seem to look at both factors, and the Canadian Law Reform Commission has suggested that either standard can be employed.
This step requires a person to be able to believe the treatment information or, if the person does not believe it, that nonbelief must not be caused by delusion brought on by mental illness or disability. For example, in Tennessee v. Northern (1978), the patient was found incompetent because she could not believe that she had gangrene. In contrast is the case of Re C (Adult: Refusal of Treatment) (1994), in which a schizophrenic patient did believe that he had gangrene but preferred to die with two feet instead of living with one and was thus found competent.
Patients must be able to reason effectively and communicate a choice. The ability to reason refers to the subjective reasoning process of the person and not whether the patient’s decision would be considered objectively reasonable by other people. Once again, whether the person’s reasoning is affected by a misperception of reality or delusion is a concern. Determining that is not easy, as some personal and religious beliefs may not be easily distinguishable from delusions, though it has been argued that religious beliefs are distinguishable from delusions because they are nonrational rather than irrational. Additionally, it is useful to see whether the religious belief predates the treatment decision, whether it is held by others, and whether the person has previously behaved consistently with that belief.
The inability to communicate is another factor. In the New Jersey case of Matter of Conroy (1985), it was ruled that patients may be incompetent because they lack the ability to communicate a decision. For example, in the New Zealand case of Auckland Area Health Board v. Attorney-General (1993), a patient with a “locked-in” syndrome was found incompetent because of his complete lack of ability to interact with the outside world. Of course, every effort should be made to find a way of communicating with the disabled person, and it may be possible for systems such as letter boards or electronic devices to bridge the communication gap.
Some judges have argued that there should be a greater level of competence required of people when they make high-risk decisions. Others have stated that it is not greater competence that is required but rather greater evidence of competence. Arguably, that is because a person either has competence to make a decision or does not. Nevertheless, there is the danger that requiring greater evidence in high-risk cases may discriminate against people who make unusual decisions, as only they will be subjected to greater scrutiny. Someone who complies with treatment options in line with medical opinion will be less likely to trigger an assessment of competence. On the other hand, the requirement that competence be disproved in adults mitigates against discrimination, because the onus is placed on doctors to rebut the presumption in favour of the person’s being competent to decide.
The legal test for competency is surprisingly similar across jurisdictions in the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. Support can be found in all those jurisdictions for a functional capacity test that examines the patient’s ability to receive, understand, and process treatment information. For example, in Re C (mentioned above), a patient with schizophrenia refused to consent to an amputation of a gangrenous leg. The judge found that the patient was competent to refuse because he was able to:
A similar formulation was adopted in the American case of Matter of Schiller (1977), in which the court stated the test for capacity as follows:
Some jurisdictions have enshrined the test in legislation. For example, in the Australian state of Queensland, the Powers of Attorney Act of 1998 defines capacity as
In England, Australia, and New Zealand, the application of the functional competency test to children is called the Gillick competence test, in honour of the case that stated that a child was competent to consent when that child was able to understand benefits and risks of proposed treatments (Gillick v. West Norfolk AHA, 1986). Courts in the United States and Canada apply an almost identical standard but refer to the test as the mature minor doctrine.
