Consumer fraud,  illicit activities that involve deceit or trickery and are perpetrated against an individual purchaser or group of customers, resulting in financial loss or physical harm.
Consumer fraud takes many forms. Examples of consumer fraud that are frequently investigated and prosecuted by federal and state regulatory agencies include marketing defective products that result in consumer injury or death, publishing false advertisements (e.g., “bait and switch”), misrepresenting the condition of homes and other real property (e.g., failing to disclose hazardous conditions, tax liens, or the presence of toxic substances), selling motor vehicles with bogus certifications (e.g., fictitious odometer statements, nonexistent warranties, or counterfeit inspection stickers), overbilling or generating fraudulent fee statements for professional services, pressuring individuals to invest in “get rich quick” schemes (e.g., high-risk stocks, multilevel marketing strategies, or uninsured bonds or securities), marking counterfeit products or selling inferior quality goods at excessive prices, and tampering with foods, medicines, cosmetics, and other consumer items.
Scams such as those that involve false loan promises, advance-fee fraud, and phony business employment opportunities serve as easy opportunities for dishonest organizations not only to make a “fast buck” but also to obtain credit-card and other personal information that can be used to commit identity-fraud offenses. Moreover, the Internet allows the smallest illegitimate enterprise to appear professional and reach a broad cross section of consumers. Variations of traditional confidence games, such as “get rich quick” pyramid schemes, fictitious charities, and unsolicited e-mails announcing a free trip, have become commonplace. All that is necessary is that the addressee provide his or her U.S. Social Security number or other identifying information, date of birth, and credit card number.
There are a variety of reasons consumers fall victim to these schemes. In many cases, consumers are vulnerable because they lack specific information regarding the product or service being offered. Some victims are also naive and find it difficult to believe that unscrupulous businesses can thrive and flourish. Additionally, many people are too busy or tired to be on guard against fraudulent or deceptive business practices. Finally, some victims may be experiencing personal problems (e.g., grief, loneliness, depression, substance abuse) that impair their decision-making abilities. These categories are not mutually exclusive, and it is not uncommon for a victim of consumer fraud to exhibit more than one of these characteristics.
Without question, the best weapon against consumer fraud is education. In the United States, regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission and the Food and Drug Administration strive to inform the public of possible scams and myths. Similarly, the Consumer Product Safety Commission constantly tests manufactured goods to ensure against structural failure, inhalation and ingestion hazards for children, and risks of accidental ignition and combustion. Watchdog and research organizations provide free literature on Internet fraud and telemarketing scams. Finally, institutional entities that strive to ensure the integrity of their members, such as the Better Business Bureau, the American Bar Association, and the American Medical Association, can be contacted along with the state attorney general’s office to determine the qualifications of prospective contractors, verify licenses, or file complaints. Although there has been steady growth in consumer protection law since the early 20th century, ranging from food safety to computer software integrity, the best defense against fraud is an informed consumer.
