Contempt,  in law, insult to, interference with, or violation of a sovereign court or legislative body. The concept of contempt is of English origin and is found only in countries that follow the common-law system. The primary importance of the notion of contempt is that it warrants judicial action in defense of the judicial or legislative power itself. Often, the power to enforce a contempt violation is without many of the safeguards that generally restrict the power of the state in the punishment of civil or criminal wrongs.
An act or language that consists of an affront to a court or interferes with the conduct of its business falls in the category of criminal contempt. However, an act of disobedience to a court order often may be treated as either civil or criminal contempt or as both. For example, an act of contempt is an insult to the court and an interference with its judicial authority and therefore constitutes criminal contempt. It also may have the consequence of depriving a party to a lawsuit of the relief that the court order afforded him and thereby constitute civil contempt. In the latter case, the court may take measures to secure to the litigant that to which he was entitled under the court order or to compensate him for the loss resulting from the disobedient act.
In both criminal and civil contempt proceedings—but more commonly in the former—a distinction is drawn between contumacious acts that take place in the presence of the court and are labeled direct contempts and those that are committed outside the geographic boundaries of the court and are called indirect, or constructive, contempts.
In England, both houses of Parliament have asserted their power to punish contumacious acts. The power to punish for contempt can entail the sanction of direct imprisonment of the offender by the offended house. However, the House of Commons can detain an offender only during its session, whereas the House of Lords can detain an offender for any fixed period, even beyond adjournment.
Until 1927, courts in the United States severely limited the investigative and contempt powers of Congress. The expansion of congressional investigative power in the 1930s was upheld by the courts with certain limitations. Although there is no doubt that a congressional committee can compel the attendance of witnesses, a witness who has refused to testify or to answer a question cannot be held in contempt unless it has been made clear to him that his refusal will be treated as contumacious. The contempt must be deliberate and intentional, and the question addressed to the witness must be pertinent to the inquiry authorized by Congress. Moreover, its pertinence must be made clear to the objecting witness. Further, the protection of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution against compulsory self-incrimination applies to witnesses before congressional committees. See also perjury.
