Credit card fraud,  act committed by any person who, with intent to defraud, uses a credit card that has been revoked, cancelled, reported lost, or stolen to obtain anything of value. Using the credit card number without possession of the actual card is also a form of credit card fraud. Stealing a person’s identity in order to receive a credit card is another more threatening form of credit card fraud, because it works in conjunction with identity theft. Credit card fraud is a problem that affects the entire consumer credit industry. It is one of the fastest-growing types of fraud and one of the most difficult to prevent.
The first revolving-credit card with universal merchant acceptance was the BankAmeriCard, originally issued in 1958 by Bank of America.  The card started in California but grew from there. In 1966, Bank of America expanded its bank card program by forming the BankAmeriCard Service Corporation, which licensed banks outside of California and allowed them to issue cards to their customers. By 1969, most regional banks converted their independent programs to either BankAmeriCard or Master Charge (now known as VISA and MasterCard, respectively). By 1970, more than 1,400 banks offered one or the other credit card.
In the early 1970s, when a credit card was used to make a purchase, it was manually processed through a slide machine, which left an imprint of the credit card number on a multiple-part receipt. The original copy was for the merchant and the carbon copy was for the customer. Technological advances led to most credit card sales being handled electronically via telephone, computer, or the Internet, with the information processed in a matter of seconds. From the time of manual machines to the modern electronic processors, credit cards have been used fraudulently.
One of the earliest ways of committing credit card fraud was either by stealing the card from someone’s wallet or by "dumpster diving" for carbon copies of credit card receipts. The use of these two methods have decreased with the advent of electronic processing of credit cards. One of the simplest ways to obtain a person’s account information or actual credit card is through postal theft. Any person who steals mail may now have access to someone’s personal information, including credit card account numbers, credit limits, and banking information. The fraudster can use this information to obtain additional cards or create new accounts without the knowledge of the true owner.
Advance payment schemes are also prevalent. Federal consumer credit regulations require that credit card issuers credit a customer’s account as soon as payment is received. This is now possible instantaneously since most transactions are electronic. Using a counterfeit or stolen credit card or credit card number, a fraudster either makes an advance payment on the card or overpays an existing balance using a counterfeit check. Because the account is credited upon receipt of payment, cash advances can be immediately drawn against the credit card before the payment has cleared. A fraudster can clear millions of dollars this way, and it will go undetected until the next bill arrives.
Another type of credit card fraud is the counterfeiting of credit cards. Criminals have been able to use technology, with relative ease, to produce fraudulent versions of existing credit cards. The Internet helped this scheme to grow. Some criminals sell the magnetic strips found on many cards or the technology to duplicate the information from a valid credit card. These magnetic strips contain all the information a fraudster needs: names, account numbers, credit limits, plus other identifying information. Using a computer system and the right equipment, a counterfeiter can create a fraudulent credit card with ease. Fraudsters also use technology to create fictitious cards. Fictitious cards are more advantageous because there is no person truly responsible for the account. The credit card companies will notice that the account is not being paid and they will attempt to contact the account holder, but no one exists.
Many financial institutions benefited from the creation of security features meant to deter fraud—such as holograms, security codes (known as credit card verification codes or card identification codes), and embedded microchips. However, as consumers embraced shopping by mail, over the telephone, and via the Internet, fraud increased exponentially. There is no clerk to check the credit card in these transactions. This creates an almost anonymous atmosphere where using fraudulent cards or numbers is easy.
One of the problems surrounding credit card fraud is the ambivalence of the consumer. Credit card agencies advertise a zero liability for credit card fraud. In some cases, a $50 fee may be incurred, but this may also be waived. If someone’s credit card is lost or stolen and it is reported, then the customer is not responsible for any fraudulent charges. It is relatively easy to know if your card has been lost or stolen; you are no longer in possession of it. However, if someone’s credit card number has been stolen and duplicated, this may not be apparent unless the credit card agency notices unusual activity and notifies the consumer, the consumer happens to check the account online, or a bill arrives with fraudulent charges. Some criminals will even go as far as to change the mailing address on the card to avoid being caught by the consumer, thus extending the time the card may be used. Many criminals, though, will simply use the number to apply for a new credit card, one that is attached to the consumer’s name, although he or she would be unaware of its existence.
It is true that a person may have little if any liability if his or her credit card or number is used illegally, but the consumer is left with the hassle that is related to having his or her credit card used fraudulently. When a credit card is issued in someone’s name, this appears on his or her credit report. If that credit card is then used fraudulently, this also appears on the credit report and can have some very serious consequences, especially if the card holder is completely unaware that an account has been opened. Collection agencies and creditors will be looking for payment, thus looking for someone to make those payments. Most people do not even realize that there are other accounts opened in their names until they are ready to make a large purchase, like a car or house, for example. A routine credit check is done, and consumers are surprised to be turned down for a car loan or mortgage because of their "bad" credit. If this does occur, then it is the consumer’s responsibility to clean his or her credit report, even if he or she can prove he or she never made any of the suspect charges.
The Fair Credit Billing Act established procedures for resolving billing errors on credit card accounts. It is the consumer’s responsibility to contact the credit agencies in order to take advantage of the law’s consumer protections. In many instances, it takes years for the credit agencies to investigate the fraudulent activity; in the meantime, the car loan or mortgage may be delayed or outright denied. One of the best preventive techniques to keep a credit record safe is by contacting the three credit bureaus (Equifax, Experian, and Trans Union) and reviewing credit reports on an annual basis.
