Defense Production Act (DPA),  U.S. federal legislation, enacted on September 8, 1950, and regularly reauthorized, that grants to the president various temporary powers to intervene in the national economy to ensure or expedite the production of goods, services, and resources which he or she deems necessary to promote the country’s “national defense.” Requested by Pres. Harry Truman in July 1950 following the outbreak of war on the Korean peninsula, the Defense Production Act (DPA) was intended to help the U.S. military and U.S. defense industries, which had been scaled back following the end of World War II, to quickly prepare for war against North Korea in defense of the South. Of the law’s original seven titles, four (titles II, IV, V, and VI) were allowed to lapse in 1953 and were formally repealed in 2009. The DPA, particularly its Title I, has been invoked hundreds of thousands of times—including by cabinet departments and other agencies exercising delegated DPA authorities—as Congress, in several reauthorizations and amendments, gradually expanded the law’s definition of “national defense” to encompass, among other things, preparedness for or response to domestic emergencies, including terrorist attacks and “natural hazards.” The DPA now defines “national defense” as “programs for military and energy production or construction, military or critical infrastructure assistance to any foreign nation, homeland security, stockpiling, space, and any directly related activity,” including “emergency preparedness activities” (defined by the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act [1988] as “all those activities and measures designed or undertaken to prepare for or minimize the effects of a hazard upon the civilian population”).
Among the current titles of the DPA, Title I generally authorizes the president, when he or she deems it “necessary or appropriate to promote the national defense,” to prioritize the performance of federal contracts or orders by businesses and to “allocate,” or control the distribution of, “materials, services, and facilities.” It also prohibits the hoarding of materials that the president has designated as scarce or likely to become scarce in the event of hoarding. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, Title I prioritization authority was used, for example, to support the production of the M1 Abrams tank and the B-2 bomber; to ensure the adequate supply of electrical power and natural gas to California when that state faced the possibility of massive blackouts; and to provide food, water, and other necessities to populations affected by natural disasters. The allocation authority under the title was used only rarely in the 20th century—for example, to support the construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline in 1974. Beginning in March 2020, amid a health care crisis in the United States brought about by the rapid spread of the deadly novel coronavirus, Pres. Donald Trump issued a series of executive orders and memoranda that applied his prioritization and allocation authorities to address widespread shortages of ventilators for critically ill patients and personal protective equipment for doctors and other medical workers.
Title III of the DPA authorizes the president to provide financial incentives to businesses, including loans or loan guarantees and purchases or purchase commitments, to increase the country’s capacity to produce goods, materials, and technology that the president deems to be “critical” or “essential” to national defense. Title III authority has been used, for example, to support the development of advanced radar and electronic warfare capabilities and the production of rare-earth elements, among many other projects.
Title VII, among other things, authorizes the president or a delegated official to approve voluntary agreements or plans of action among competing businesses that in normal circumstances would violate or potentially violate antitrust or contract laws and, by the 1988 Exon-Florio amendment, to review and suspend or prohibit proposed acquisitions, mergers, or takeovers involving U.S. and foreign companies that “threaten to impair the national security.” The title also partly immunizes businesses against liability for damages or penalties for complying with rules and regulations issued under the DPA. Title VII authority under the Exon-Florio amendment was used in 1990, for example, to force a Chinese aerospace technology company to divest itself of a Seattle-based manufacturer of aircraft parts.
By the four repealed titles of the DPA, the president was briefly (until 1953) authorized to requisition materials and property from businesses (Title II), to ration consumer goods and impose wage and price controls (Title IV), to force the settlement of labour disputes (Title V), and to regulate consumer credit and credit and loans for real-estate construction (Title VI).
