delinquency,  criminal behaviour, especially that carried out by a juvenile. Depending on the nation of origin, a juvenile becomes an adult anywhere between the ages of 15 to 18, although the age is sometimes lowered for murder and other serious crimes. Delinquency implies conduct that does not conform to the legal or moral standards of society; it usually applies only to acts that, if performed by an adult, would be termed criminal. It is thus distinguished from a status offense, a term applied in the United States and other national legal systems to acts considered wrongful when committed by a juvenile but not when committed by an adult. See also juvenile court; juvenile justice. 
In Western countries, delinquent behaviour is most common in the 14- to 15-year-old age group. At age 14, most delinquent conduct involves minor theft. By age 16 or 17, more violent and dangerous acts, including assault and the use of a weapon, become prevalent. Most delinquents do not continue this behaviour into their adult life, for, as the circumstances of their lives change and they get a job, marry, or simply mature out of their turbulent adolescence, their conduct usually falls in line with societal standards. Although the evidence is ambiguous, most delinquents adjust to a noncriminal life, yet the proportion of delinquents who become criminals is higher than that of nondelinquents. In the United States, boys make up 80 percent of the delinquent population, and this rate is similar throughout Europe and Japan.
Schools are often the forum in which delinquent behaviour originates. Most delinquents perform poorly in school and are unhappy in the school environment. Many delinquents are dropouts who leave school at an early age but have no job opportunities. Juvenile gangs often perform delinquent acts, not solely out of frustration with society but also out of a need to attain status within their group. A gang can provide the rewards a juvenile cannot get from his school or other institution.
Efforts have been made to identify potential delinquents at an early age in order to provide preventive treatment. Such predictions of delinquency generally depend not only on the child’s behaviour in school but also on the quality of the child’s home life. There are many elements that delinquents share in their home lives. Their parents are frequently heavy drinkers who are involved in crime themselves and are unable to provide emotional or financial support for their children. Discipline is inconsistent and often relies on physical force. Most attempts to detect future delinquents have failed, however. Indeed, it has been found that the stigma of being identified as a potential delinquent often causes the child to commit delinquent acts.
It is the responsibility of the state to deal with delinquent offenders. Probation, the most commonly used method of handling delinquents, is an arrangement whereby the delinquent is given a suspended sentence and in return must live by a prescribed set of rules under the supervision of a probation officer. Probation is most frequently granted to first offenders and delinquents charged with minor offenses. Probation can be a mandate of law, or it can be left to the court’s discretion. Probation requires the delinquent to lead a moderate, productive lifestyle, with financial responsibilities. If these requirements are not met, the delinquent may be placed in an institution. A delinquent will sometimes be placed in the foster care of a stable family, as a final method of keeping a juvenile out of an institution.
The treatment of delinquents on probation and in institutions ranges from a strict disciplinarian method to a more psychological approach, centring on psychoanalysis and group therapy. The probation officer must attempt to combine authority and compassion in the twin role of enforcer and social worker. This makes the role of the probation officer extremely difficult, while the responsibilities are great. Despite the problems of the probation system, studies have indicated that probation is effective in a majority of all cases.
