Digital rights management (DRM),  protection of copyrighted works by various means to control or prevent digital copies from being shared over computer networks or telecommunications networks.
The digitalization of content has challenged traditional copyright laws on two fronts. First, it has enabled nearly cost-free reproduction and large-scale distribution of digital content. Second, existing digital content easily can be remixed and “mashed-up” (combined in various ways) with other content to produce new works. In response to these changes, copyright holders have sought greater protection through legal and technological remedies.
One such tactic was the installation of hidden or secret files, such as rootkits, on users’ computers when a compact disc (CD) or digital videodisc (DVD) is first inserted into their machines. These files may limit the number of times that users can install software (a potential problem for unstable computer systems or “buggy” programs that may need to be deleted and reinstalled), monitor user activities, and prevent copying or transmitting protected files over network connections. In the case of some computer programs, the software periodically contacts the software maker over the Internet in order to pass a verification check; if it fails the test or cannot connect, the program may become unusable. In the most controversial example of such digital rights management (DRM) protection, security researchers discovered in 2005 that Sony had installed rootkits on CDs that made it impossible to copy music but possible to report back to Sony about listener habits. After public outcry and lawsuits, Sony recalled some of the CDs and stopped installing rootkits on future releases.
In U.S. law, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1995 banned the development and distribution of technology designed to sidestep DRM, as well as circumventing DRM to access works that are under copyright. Since computer software can be copyrighted, the concept of DRM has expanded to products that contain software. For example, in 2015 the tractor company John Deere claimed that circumventing a tractor’s diagnostic software would be illegal under the DMCA. This claim conflicted with some farmers, who felt that they should be able to repair their own tractors without having to contact a John Deere representative. The conflict between the farmers and John Deere reflected the larger controversy over DRM, with the pro-DRM side claiming that such measures protect intellectual property and the anti-DRM side claiming that such measures negate the rights consumers have over their own property.
