Drug cartel,  an illicit consortium of independent organizations formed to limit competition and control the production and distribution of illegal drugs. Drug cartels are extremely well-organized, well-financed, efficient, and ruthless. Since the 1980s, they have dominated the international narcotics trade.
The U.S. war on drugs began under the administration of Pres. Richard Nixon. Following his victory in the 1968 presidential election, Nixon declared that drug abuse was “public enemy number one.” Efforts to stop the flow of illegal drugs into the United States—which was the primary destination for most narcotics—became increasingly focused on curtailing foreign production of marijuana and heroin. It was during the 1970s, however, that a growing U.S. demand for cocaine led to the creation of the earliest drug cartels.
The Medellín cartel, the first major drug cartel in Colombia, began in the mid-1970s when Colombian marijuana traffickers began smuggling small quantities of cocaine into the United States. As the trade grew, a diverse group of entrepreneurs became involved, ranging from well-respected individuals with backgrounds in ranching and horsing to petty criminals. The growing demand for cocaine soon prompted the expansion of the trade beyond small amounts tucked into suitcases. The cartel purchased private planes to carry its shipments, constructed more sophisticated drug laboratories, and even purchased a small island in the Caribbean for refueling its aircraft.
Violence, lapses in organization, and competition from the emergent Cali cartel (centered in Cali, Colombia) fractured the Medellín cartel in the late 1980s and early ’90s. Pablo Escobar, leader of the Medellín cartel, became one of the most wanted men in the world and was forced into hiding. In 1993 he was killed during a shoot-out with a special Colombian police task force, leading to the primacy of the Cali cartel.
The Cali cartel had a more subtle style and sophisticated approach than the Medellín cartel. The members of the Cali cartel quickly reinvested their drug profits into legitimate businesses. They deliberately undermined the Medellín cartel as it became increasingly unpopular and violent. The Cali cartel went so far as to help Colombian police and the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) track down Escobar. Many leaders of the Cali cartel were arrested in the 1990s, and by the next decade the organization had largely disbanded. While other cartels in Colombia filled the void, their power failed to match that of their predecessors.
In the 1960s and early ’70s, Mexico was known primarily as a supplier of marijuana. However, as U.S. efforts in Colombia slowed the flow of drugs from South America, Mexico emerged as a source of cocaine. The Tijuana cartel—created by members of the Arellano Félix family, especially the brothers Ramon and Benjamin—was founded in the late 1980s and became one of the most powerful cartels in Mexico, responsible for shipping hundreds of millions of dollars worth of cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine into the United States.
However, Tijuana faced fierce—and often violent—competition from other drug organizations, notably the Juárez, Gulf, and Sinaloa cartels. Under the leadership of Joaquín Guzmán Loera—commonly known as El Chapo (“Shorty”), the Sinaloa cartel emerged as one of the world’s most powerful drug cartels in the early 21st century; according to various reports at the time, it accounted for the majority of illegal drugs in the United States. The Sinaloa cartel amassed power through murder, bribes, and innovative smuggling techniques, notably the use of tunnels. In the early 2000s, the Mexican government, aided by U.S. officials, intensified its efforts to crack down on cartels, imprisoning numerous leaders. The resulting turf battles sparked unprecedented violence in Mexico.
Organized-crime groups in Asia, Africa, Italy, and the former Soviet Union have also been linked to the sale and production of illegal narcotics. Israeli, Russian, and west European drug traffickers are primarily responsible for the sale and distribution of Ecstasy. Criminal groups in Southeast and Southwestern Asia use New York City as a hub to move heroin into the United States. The sale and distribution of marijuana from Southeast Asia is generally limited to the West Coast, but marijuana also enters the United States from Canada.
The end of the Cold War and a new focus on terrorism altered the terminology of the drug war. The narco-terrorist organization emerged as a new threat, defined as an organized group that participated in drug trafficking in order to fund politically motivated terrorist activities. The DEA claimed that Afghanistan under Taliban rule was a preeminent example of a state funded by the illicit production of opium. However, regional experts argued that opium production was essentially wiped out by the Taliban’s strict Islamic rule. Following the U.S. invasion in late 2001 and the overthrow of the Taliban regime, production of Afghan opium rose steadily.
Leaders of drug cartels have been retroactively defined by the DEA as having been narco-terrorists. For example, Escobar of the Medellín cartel is now described as having committed “terrorist activities,” such as the bombing of a commercial airliner in 1989. He also was responsible for the assassination of politicians, presidential candidates, police officers, journalists, and Colombian supreme court justices.
Groups that were often designated as terrorist organizations, including Hezbollah, Ḥamās, the Shining Path in Peru, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, FARC in Colombia, and ETA in Spain, were later also described in terms of their involvement in narco-terrorism. Many of these groups began as Marxist socialist organizations and were defined as such until the demise of the Soviet Union in 1991. In this instance, the Cold War, the war on drugs, and the war on terrorism merged indistinguishably.
The connection between drugs and terrorism was made even more explicit in UN Security Council Resolution 1373. The resolution, adopted in the immediate wake of the September 11, 2001, attacks in the United States, remarked on “the close connection between international terrorism and transnational organized crime, illicit drugs, money-laundering, illegal arms-trafficking, and illegal movement of nuclear, chemical, biological and other potentially deadly materials” and emphasized the “need to enhance coordination of efforts on national, subregional, regional and international levels in order to strengthen a global response to this serious challenge and threat to international security.”
