European Court of Human Rights (ECHR),  judicial organ established in 1959 that is charged with supervising the enforcement of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (1950; commonly known as the European Convention on Human Rights), which was drawn up by the Council of Europe. The convention obligates signatories to guarantee various civil and political freedoms, including the freedom of expression and religion and the right to a fair trial. It is headquartered in Strasbourg, France.
Individuals who believe their human rights have been violated and who are unable to remedy their claim through their national legal system may petition the ECHR to hear the case and render a verdict. The court, which also can hear cases brought by states, may award financial compensation, and its decisions often require changes in national law. Consisting of more than 40 judges elected for nonrenewable nine-year terms, the ECHR normally works in seven-judge chambers. Judges do not represent their countries, and there is no limit to the number of judges a single country may contribute. The court is also divided into four sections, the judges of which represent a balance of gender and geography and take account of the various legal systems. A Grand Chamber of 17 judges is sometimes used in cases where the seven-judge panel determines that a serious issue of interpretation is involved or that the decision of the panel might contravene existing case law.
In order to handle the growing number of cases more efficiently, the European Court of Human Rights and the European Commission of Human Rights, which was established in 1954, were merged in 1998 into a reconstituted court and enabled to hear individual cases without the prior assent of the individual’s national government. Despite these changes the ECHR’s backlog continued to grow, prompting the adoption in 2010 of additional streamlining measures, which included prohibiting the court from hearing individual cases in which the applicant has not suffered a “significant disadvantage.” The court’s decisions are binding on all signatories.
