Faragher v. City of Boca Raton,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 26, 1998, ruled (7–2) that—under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964—an employer may be liable for supervisory employees whose sexual harassment of subordinates results in “a hostile work environment amounting to job discrimination.” However, the court also held that an employer could make an affirmative defense in certain situations.
The case centred on Beth Ann Faragher, a college student who, between 1985 and 1990, worked as a lifeguard for the City of Boca Raton, Florida. Faragher alleged that during this time two male supervisors made offensive sexual remarks and lewd gestures to her and other female lifeguards, touched them inappropriately, and asked them for sex. One of the supervisors reportedly said to Faragher, “Date me or clean the toilets for a year.” Faragher did not file a formal complaint—Boca Raton had a sexual harassment policy, but it was never distributed to the lifeguards—though she did mention the incidents to another male supervisor. In 1992, two years after resigning, Faragher filed suit under Title VII and Florida law, alleging that the two supervisors created a sexually hostile work environment and that, as agents for Boca Raton, they made the city liable for nominal damages, costs, and lawyer fees.
A federal district court ruled in favour of Faragher. It imputed liability on Boca Raton on the basis of three justifications: the city had “knowledge, or constructive knowledge” of the harassment; the supervisors were agents of the city, and “traditional agency principles” applied; and that a supervisor knew of the harassment and had failed to act. On further review, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals reversed in favour of the city. The court explained that employers can be “indirectly liable for hostile environment sexual harassment by a superior” only if the harassment took place within the scope of the supervisor’s employment, if the employer assigned “a nondelegable duty to a supervisor and an employee is injured because of the supervisor’s failure to carry out that duty,” or if there was an agency relationship present that helped supervisors perpetuate the harassment. On the basis of those conditions, the court refused to impose liability on the city and dismissed the lawsuit.
On March 25, 1998, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. In an opinion authored by Justice David Souter, the court acknowledged that there was a conflict between a traditional view that harassing behaviour by supervisors is always a “frolic” and outside the scope of employment, as compared with a more modern view that all supervisory behaviour, including harassing behaviour, is generally foreseeable and that there are good policy reasons to assign the burden of improper supervisory behaviour to employers as one of the costs of doing business. If this conflict is decided in favour of assigning vicarious liability to the employer for the misuse of supervisory authority, the court found, these decisions must in turn be balanced by providing a means for employers to raise affirmative defense against liability.
In light of its analysis, the Supreme Court was of the opinion that employers can be subject to vicarious liability when supervisors create a discriminatory environment. At the same time, the court pointed out that employers may raise affirmative defenses to liability or damages. The court observed that such affirmative defenses have two elements: (1) employers must have exercised reasonable care to prevent and promptly correct any sexually harassing behaviour, and (2) victimized employees unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the employer. The court added that these affirmative defenses are unavailable when the harassment ends in tangible, adverse job-related actions, including demotions and discharges. The Supreme Court thus overturned the Eleventh Circuit’s decision and remanded the case for reinstatement of the district court’s ruling.
