Forgery,   in law, making of a false writing with an intent to defraud. Writing, to be forgery, must either have legal significance or be commonly relied upon in business transactions. It need not be handwriting; the law of forgery covers printing, engraving, and typewriting as well. In most jurisdictions, however, “writing” excludes objects such as works of art, which when misrepresented are legally considered to be falsifications or frauds. 
Checks, negotiable instruments, contracts, wills, and deeds are examples of documents that may be forged. But forgery also encompasses some documents that have no legal efficacy but are commonly relied upon in the business world, such as a false letter of recommendation for employment.
The forger may begin with an entirely blank piece of paper, with an incomplete genuine instrument with blanks to be filled, or with a complete genuine instrument that may be altered. The usual manner of forging is to prepare a false writing and sign another’s name to it or to make a material alteration to a valid writing already signed by another. But a writing that contains false statements is not necessarily the “false-writing” that forgery requires. A check drawn on a bank wherein the drawer has no funds is not a forgery even though the drawer implies that he has funds there, but it is a genuine writing containing lies; the crime, therefore, is that of obtaining property by false pretenses.
It is not forgery to sign another’s name or to fill in blanks or alter a genuine writing in the honest, though mistaken, belief that such conduct is authorized. There must be fraudulent intent. If such intent is present, there is forgery even if no one is actually defrauded by the false document.
One who does not himself forge an instrument may be guilty of the related crime of uttering a forged instrument, that is, the offering as genuine of a writing that the offender knows to be false—done with intent to defraud. Some modern statutes include this crime with forgery. See also counterfeiting. 
