Freedom of the Press Act of 1766,  Swedish legislation regarded as the world’s first law supporting the freedom of the press and freedom of information. Passed by the Swedish Riksdag (parliament) as “His Majesty’s Gracious Ordinance Relating to Freedom of Writing and of the Press” (Konglige Majestäts Nådige Förordning, Angående Skrif- och Tryck-friheten) on December 2, 1766, the Freedom of the Press Act abolished the censorship of all printed publications, including those imported from abroad but excluding those on academic and theological subjects. Furthermore, it guaranteed public access to documents drawn up by government agencies. However, the strong punishments for writing against the state or king were kept, though control was transferred from the public censor to the publishers.
Following the death of King Charles XII in 1718, the Swedish throne was passed to a series of weak kings. The decline of the monarchy led to an increase in the importance of the Riksdag. Though the Riksdag retained its four chambers—for nobility, clergy, townsmen, and farmers—it developed two strong parties known as the “Hats” and the “Nightcaps.” During the reign of King Adolf Frederick, the Nightcaps sought the liberalization of Swedish society and sparked intense political debates, which sparked a number of printed political pamphlets. Given that the public censor himself participated in those debates, the censorship process became inherently flawed. Influenced by Anders Chydenius, a liberal pastor and member of the Nightcaps, the Riksdag passed the Freedom of the Press Act, which abolished the censorship of most publications and granted citizens access to official documents to encourage the free exchange of ideas.
In 1809 a new constitution was passed by the Riksdag, containing the main principles of the 1766 law. The censorship of academic and theological publications was abolished in 1810, and the law was again expanded in 1812 with principles of editorial responsibility and specific rules for the legal process. In 1949 the law was revised, but its main principles are still the same as in 1766.
