Goss v. Board of Education of Knoxville, Tennessee,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 3, 1963, ruled (9–0) that a Tennessee school board’s desegregation plan that included a transfer provision, which would have permitted segregated schools, was a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause.
In the late 1950s the Knoxville, Tennessee, public school system submitted a plan in an attempt to desegregate its formerly unitary schools through rezoning. The plan included transfer provisions, which allowed students who lived in areas that were rezoned and were minorities at their newly assigned schools to transfer, on the basis of race, back to their formerly segregated schools, where their race would have been in the majority. Both a federal district court and the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals approved the plan. In 1959, however, African American parents and students, including the family of Josephine Goss, challenged the constitutionality of the plan, alleging that it perpetuated a racially segregated school system.
The case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on March 20–21, 1963. It held that the racial classifications for transfers between schools violated the equal protection clause. The court noted that in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), it had ruled that state-imposed separation in public schools was inherently unequal. The court added that the transfer provisions ran counter to its opinion in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (II) (1955), wherein it directed federal district courts to “consider the adequacy of any plans” in creating unitary, racially nondiscriminatory school systems.
The Supreme Court indicated that the fact that each race was free to transfer to a segregated school did not save Knoxville’s plan, because the transfer provisions would have tended to perpetuate segregation. The court also reasoned that, because of the local difficulties and barriers they created, the transfer provisions did not meet the Brown (II) mandate of “good faith compliance at the earliest practicable date” and “with all deliberate speed.” The Supreme Court thus reversed the lower court’s rulings and remanded for further proceedings.
