Industrial court, also called labour court,  any of a variety of tribunals established to settle disputes between management and labour, most frequently disputes between employers and organized labour.
The industrial courts stem loosely from the guild courts of the Middle Ages. Modern industrial courts began in France in 1806 and developed in Germany from factory courts until an industrial code for Prussia (1869) brought them into the government. These courts handled disputes over back wages and compensation at discharge and also served as boards of arbitration. Ultimately, industrial courts were broadened beyond commerce to include industry. The French courts operated more on an ad hoc basis than the German courts. Other European courts following the French model included the Belgian, Portuguese, Spanish, Italian, and Swiss.
In the United Kingdom the industrial court stemmed from an act of the government that empowered its appointment; a permanent body was created by the Industrial Courts Act of 1919. Since 1975 the court has been called the Central Arbitration Committee. The minister of labour can refer a dispute to ad hoc arbitrators or to the industrial court for an award if the parties consent. If the parties do not consent, the labour minister can refer the matter to a court of inquiry or commission of investigation for recommendations; however, these recommendations are not legally enforceable. Thus, matters may end in the civil courts. In the United States employment disputes regularly end in civil courts. Only in Australia is the industrial court a court in both name and fact.
In the United States similar tribunals include the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), which was created by the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (amended in 1947). The NLRB arbitrates controversies over the union representation of workers and provides mediation services from the federal Mediation and Conciliation Service for all industries except railroads and airlines, which are both served by the National Mediation Board. Various states also have such bodies. Disputes in the United States are generally settled privately, which is also the case in Canada and Sweden. Like the United States, Canada has both national and provincial bodies.
