Juge d’instruction, (French: judge of inquiry)  in France, magistrate responsible for conducting the investigative hearing that precedes a criminal trial. In this hearing the major evidence is gathered and presented, and witnesses are heard and depositions taken. If the juge d’instruction is not convinced that there is sufficient evidence of guilt to warrant a trial at the end of the proceedings, no trial will occur. This process differs somewhat from the grand jury hearing in the Anglo-American system, under which the grand jury need find only probable cause in order to return an indictment for trial.
The preliminary investigative procedure was developed in France as early as the 17th century, but the position of juge d’instruction was not instituted until the mid-19th century. Juges are appointed by the president for three-year terms (which are renewable) upon the recommendation of the Ministry of Justice. The juge d’instruction handles a case only if ordered to do so by the procureur (public prosecutor) or when requested to do so by a private citizen. Once the juge d’instruction’s investigation has begun, the accused must be supplied with counsel, who must be given access to all documents and evidence. The hearing is structured to ensure the protection of the accused. Although he has a right to be heard, he may choose to remain silent.
In conducting the hearing, the juge d’instruction has a wide range of powers available. He may issue warrants allowing the authorities to search the accused’s residence and seize necessary evidence. He also may issue warrants requiring other people to appear as witnesses, or he may request experts to testify. If there is conflicting testimony, witnesses are confronted with each other and often with the accused. At the end of the hearing, the procureur may, if he chooses, present his opinion, in the form of a plea.
The evidence collected and the testimony of witnesses make up a case’s dossier, which serves as a guide for the juge in the subsequent plenary hearing in open court, particularly to verify testimony. It is available to the defense in its entirety so that the element of surprise, so prevalent in common-law trials, is eliminated from the main hearing. However, the dossier is not available to the jury, which must base its decision on the facts presented in open court. It is on the strength of this file that the juge d’instruction bases his decision as to whether to commit a case to trial. He may issue an order of non-lieu (French: “no case”), or, if he decides there is enough evidence for a trial, he will commit a case involving a serious misdemeanour or a lesser felony to the criminal court, whereas a major felony must first go to the chamber of accusation of the Court of Appeal (Cour d’Appel) for the pretrial hearing. If the Court of Appeal supports the juge’s recommendation, it will turn the case over to the Assize Court (Cour d’Assise), the only court in France with a jury.
