Kadrmas v. Dickinson Public Schools,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 24, 1988, ruled that a North Dakota statute allowing certain public school districts to charge a fee for bus service did not violate the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In 1979 North Dakota adopted a statute that authorized certain school districts to charge for bus services. Dickinson Public Schools was such a district, and it instituted a transportation fee of $97 per school year for one child and $150 for two children. The board charged the fee in order to defray transportation costs for students who lived in sparsely populated areas. In 1985 Paula Kadrmas refused to sign the board’s transportation contract and instead chose to transport her daughter Sarita to and from school on her own. However, after realizing that driving her daughter was cost-prohibitive, she challenged the validity of the fee in state courts, arguing that the charge violated the equal protection clause.
After a state court dismissed the suit, it was appealed to the Supreme Court of North Dakota, which rejected the mother’s arguments that the transportation policy violated the state constitution’s requirement of providing free schooling for students. The court also ruled that the policy passed constitutional muster under the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, because even though not all school systems chose to adopt a policy of charging fees for transporting children to school, the board’s doing so was not discriminatory.
On March 30, 1988, the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court. It noted that school transportation was not required by the constitution and that a school board’s decision to provide such a service does not mean that it should then be free. The court was of the opinion that because the transportation fee was a means of assisting the government’s intent of allocating limited resources, the statute that permitted the board to charge a fee did not violate the equal protection clause by impermissibly discriminating on the basis of wealth. In addition, the court recognized that transportation is different from charging fees for such items as tuition or instructional materials. To this end, the court concluded that the board had the authority to exercise its option of charging a bus fee, because transportation did not go to the essence of the state’s obligation of providing all students with a free public-school education. The decision of the North Dakota Supreme Court was thus affirmed.
