Lee v. Weisman,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on June 24, 1992, ruled (5–4) that it was unconstitutional for a public school in Rhode Island to have a member of the clergy deliver a prayer at graduation ceremonies. The court held that it violated the First Amendment’s establishment clause, which generally prohibits the government from establishing, advancing, or giving favour to any religion.
In Providence, Rhode Island, principals at public middle and high schools were allowed to include clergy members in graduation ceremonies. In 1989 Robert E. Lee, principal of Nathan Bishop Middle School, selected a rabbi to deliver the prayers; provided him with the pamphlet “Guidelines for Civic Occasions,” which stated that public prayers should be written “with inclusiveness and sensitivity”; and told him that the prayers should not be sectarian. Daniel Weisman, a parent of a student at the school, objected to the inclusion of prayers at the ceremony and sought a temporary restraining order. His request was denied, and the rabbi delivered the invocation and benediction, which had two references to “God” and one to “Lord.”
Weisman then sought a permanent injunction, and a federal district court found the prayers unconstitutional under the so-called Lemon test, which the U.S. Supreme Court had outlined in Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971). The test required that a government practice must (a) have “a clearly secular purpose,” (b) “have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion,” and (c) “avoid[s] excessive government entanglement with religion.” The First Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, also on the basis of Lemon.
On November 6, 1991, the case was argued before the Supreme Court. It noted that Lee’s actions—deciding to include a prayer and selecting a rabbi—were attributable to the state. Despite what the court characterized as the “good-faith attempt” to eliminate sectarianism from the prayers, it was of the opinion that “our precedents do not permit school officials to assist in composing prayers as an incident to a formal exercise for their students.” The court also took issue with the school’s position that attendance at graduation was voluntary, noting that graduation is a rite of passage. According to the court, compelling graduates and their families to make a choice between missing graduation or conforming “to the state-supported practice” leaves them “with no alternative but to submit.” The Supreme Court thus held that the prayer exercises were a violation of the establishment clause. The decision of the First Circuit was upheld.
