National Security Act,  U.S. military- and foreign-policy reform legislation, signed into law by Pres. Harry S. Truman in July 1947, which reorganized the structure of the U.S. armed forces following World War II. It created the office of Secretary of Defense to oversee the nation’s military establishment and it also established the National Security Council (NSC) and separate departments for each branch of the armed forces. It provided for the coordination of the military with other departments and agencies of the government concerned with national security, such as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and for presidential and congressional oversight with respect to matters of national intelligence.
The stated goal of the National Security Act was “to provide a comprehensive program for the future security of the United States.” To accomplish this, the act made several organizational changes. It combined the former Department of War and the Navy Department (which also included the U.S. Marine Corps) into the Department of Defense (DoD), which also included the Departments of the Army and Air Force. The reorganization was intended to create a clear and direct line of command for all military services, to eliminate the duplication of effort in the DoD (particularly in the fields of research and engineering), to provide more efficient and economical administration in the defense establishment, to provide unified strategic direction for the armed forces, and to facilitate the operation of the military under unified command. Although the reorganization was not undertaken to establish a single chief of staff over the armed forces nor an overall armed forces general staff, the act did establish the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) to advise the president on military strategy and planning.
The National Security Act placed a tremendous amount of emphasis on the coordination of national security with the intelligence community and its many capabilities. Most notably, the legislation created the CIA and established the position of director of central intelligence, who was charged with managing the CIA as well as overseeing the entire intelligence community.
The National Security Act also established the NSC to assist in the coordination of the nation’s security assets. The NSC includes the president, vice president, the president’s national security adviser, the secretary of state, the secretary of defense, and other presidential appointees approved by the Senate. The NSC also manages smaller subcommittees to address threats to national security.
