New York Times Co. v. Sullivan,  legal case in which, on March 9, 1964, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled unanimously (9–0) that, for a libel suit to be successful, the complainant must prove that the offending statement was made with “ ‘actual malice’—that is, with knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.” Specifically, the case involved an advertisement that appeared in The New York Times in March 1960 that outlined how African Americans had been oppressed and that asked readers to contribute money to the struggle to end racial segregation in the South.
The city of Montgomery, Alabama, was already under considerable civic stress when The New York Times published a full-page ad titled “Heed Their Rising Voices” on March 29, 1960. On February 25, 35 students from the all-black Alabama State College sought service in a snack bar in the basement of the Montgomery County Courthouse. They were rebuffed and arrested. The following day Governor John Patterson, who was ex officio chairman of the state board of education, demanded the expulsion of the students from the public college. Two days later most of the 800 students at Alabama State marched to the state capitol to protest Patterson’s actions. While state and Montgomery police stood by, bat-wielding members of the Ku Klux Klan assaulted the students. The attack went unpunished even though the Montgomery Advertiser ran pictures of the incident, with several members of the mob clearly identified.
A group including veteran civil rights activists Bayard Rustin, A. Phillip Randolph, and Harry Emerson Fosdick determined to take out a full-page ad in the Times that would not only condemn the violence in Montgomery but also raise funds for the larger cause of civil rights. Rustin wanted the ad to be hard-hitting, and he told the author, John Murray, to add the names of prominent people as endorsers to make it more appealing. When Murray protested that those people had not been contacted for permission to use their names, Rustin assured him that there would be no problem, since they had all been involved in the movement and had lent their names previously. Although the Times had a department to check on the accuracy of ads submitted to it, the person staffing that office when the copy came in signed off without questioning the material, because it “was endorsed by a number of people who are well known and whose reputation I had no reason to question.” The exact wording of the ad and accusations therein would prove critical.
The ad invoked “Southern violators,” echoing prevailing Northern stereotypes of Dixie as a racist, violent, and backward region. The ad named no individuals and made no reference to any officeholder but painted a damaging picture of police forces in the South, which were in fact earning a reputation for their brutality in dealing with civil rights demonstrators. Rustin and his colleagues chose the Times because of its prestige and large readership. They directed their ad not at the South but at white, progressive, intellectual leaders in the North.
Among the people in Alabama who read the ad was Merton Roland Nachman, the foremost libel lawyer in Montgomery and one of the best in the state. Although he considered himself a political moderate, Nachman, like many others in the South, felt increasingly frustrated by the attention Northern newspapers like the Times gave to the actions of what he considered a radical minority causing all the trouble.
Nachman brought the ad to the attention of the three city commissioners and told the police commissioner, L.B. Sullivan, that there was no doubt that, even though he had not been directly named in the ad, he could bring an action against the Times. The ad cast aspersions on Sullivan because it implied that the police force was complicit in the bombing of the home of Martin Luther King, Jr., and, more generally, that it fomented or condoned acts of terrorism that left African Americans fearful for their lives. The city commissioners were easily convinced, and Nachman began proceedings on their behalf in state court.
At this time in legal history, advantage in libel cases fell to the plaintiffs. Most states recognized a difference between fact and opinion and protected the right to express the latter, but only so far as the factual basis of the opinion was accurate. Here again the burden of proof of accuracy lay with the accused (the speaker or publisher), who would lose that privilege if any of the published statements proved factually incorrect. A few states allowed the privilege if there were only minor errors in fact made either through inadvertence or in the good-faith belief that they were correct. Alabama, however, took a stricter view: under Alabama law the expression of opinion was protected only to the extent that it rested on a completely accurate factual basis.
Nachman was confident of winning the case because the ad did indeed contain factual errors. For instance, it alluded to the students marching to the capitol singing “My Country ’Tis of Thee,” though they had in fact sung “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Contrary to what the ad suggested, the police did not “ring” the campus (though they were  deployed in large numbers). Moreover, four of the ministers listed as sponsors of the ad testified that they had never seen it and that their names had been used without their permission.
Nachman’s confidence proved well-founded. The Sullivan trial took less than three days, and the jury brought in a verdict for the plaintiff in under three hours for the full amount that Sullivan had demanded—$500,000.
For the Times to appeal the verdict up to the U.S. Supreme Court, it clearly had to find grounds that would somehow nullify Alabama’s strict libel law. Although the suit no doubt had the effect of silencing the press, L.B. Sullivan had in fact been libeled as state law defined it at that time.
