Petition,  written instrument directed to some individual, official, legislative body, or court in order to redress a grievance or to request the granting of a favour. Petitions are also used to collect signatures to enable a candidate to get on a ballot or to put an issue before the electorate. They are also used to pressure representatives and deputies to vote in a certain way.
Most governments allow citizens to petition in some form for redress of grievances, and, indeed, in many countries it is an established right. The history of its growth has been wide and varied. In England the right of petitioning the crown was recognized indirectly as early as Magna Carta (1215) and reaffirmed in the Bill of Rights of 1689. At first, petitions to the crown appear to have been for the redress of private and local grievances. Moreover, in Parliament many statutes were drawn up based on petitions sent from the House of Commons to the crown and the latter’s answers. Although the right to petition Parliament itself is not mentioned in the Bill of Rights, it is a convention of the constitution. In modern times the presentation of public petitions plays little effective part in parliamentary affairs because most fail to conform to very strict tests of technical validity.
In the United States, the right under the First Amendment to the Constitution to petition the government for redress of grievances is one of the basic guarantees of civil liberties. In the Revolutionary era, American political theorists emphatically asserted that the colonists were entitled to all the historic guarantees of English liberty, and Thomas Jefferson in the Declaration of Independence listed the flouting of “petitions for redress” as a major grievance against the British king. In 1789 the first U.S. Congress incorporated the right of petition along with other freedoms in the First Amendment of the Bill of Rights. Thereafter, virtually all the states incorporated guarantees of petition in their own constitutions. Both Congress and the various state legislatures still have well-defined procedures for receiving and acting upon materials of this kind. Although the rules are not as stringent as those in England, individual officials often have wide discretion in interpreting the validity of petitions.
In France the petitions of the people and the National Assembly played a significant role throughout the Revolution.
