Ponzi scheme,  fraudulent and illegal investment operation that promises quick, easy, and significant returns on investments with little or no risk. A Ponzi scheme is a type of pyramid scheme in which the operator, at the pyramid’s top, acquires a small group of investors that is initially provided with tremendous investment returns via funds secured from a second group of investors. The second group, in turn, is paid with funds obtained from a third group of investors, and so on until the number of potential investors is exhausted and the scheme collapses. The operator may either appropriate a portion of incoming investments as the scheme progresses or wait until the operation is about to collapse before absconding with the funds.
Although historians believe variations of the Ponzi scheme existed as early as the 17th century, the scheme was named for Carlo Ponzi, an Italian immigrant to the United States who scammed thousands of New England residents out of millions of dollars in 1919–20 with his plan to sell European postage stamps. Ponzi initially acquired a small group of investors with the promise of doubling their investments within 90 days. As word of the supposed get-rich-quick investment opportunity spread, Ponzi’s pool of investors expanded, allowing him to raise significant amounts of money in very short periods of time—in one instance, he raised $1 million in only three hours—and thus maintain the trust of his investors. Within nine months, however, Ponzi’s scheme had collapsed. Although his entire investment had amounted to only $30 worth of stamps, he ultimately defrauded thousands of investors out of approximately $15 million with his scheme. Ponzi was arrested in 1920 and charged with multiple counts of fraud and larceny and sentenced to prison.
Ponzi was by no means the last to effect the scheme. More recently, in 2007 Chinese businessman Wang Fengyou, founder of Yilishen Tianxi Group, was arrested on charges of “instigating social unrest” after angry victims of his ant-farming scheme, which allegedly conned an estimated one million people out of more than $1 billion, mobbed government offices in protest. In 2008 David Murcia Guzmán, founder of the now-defunct Colombian financial group D.M.G. Grupo Holding SA (DMG), was arrested and charged with money laundering for operating a prepaid-debit-card scheme that purportedly robbed investors of more than $1 billion; several others were later arrested and charged in connection with the scheme. In the same year, Bernie Madoff, a former chairman of the NASDAQ stock exchange and founder and chairman of Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC, was charged with fraud for operating a Ponzi scheme that allegedly defrauded investors out of some $50 billion. In March 2009 he pleaded guilty to 11 charges of fraud and money laundering, and in June he was sentenced to 150 years in prison.
