Posse comitatus, (Latin: “force of the county”)  ancient English institution consisting of the shire’s force of able-bodied private citizens summoned to assist in maintaining public order. Originally raised and commanded by the sheriff, the posse comitatus became a purely civil instrument as the office of sheriff later lost its military functions. From time to time, legislation gave authority to other peace officers and magistrates to call upon the power of the county.
In early times, attendance at the posse comitatus was enforced by the penalty of culvertage, or turntail, which involved the forfeiture of property and perpetual servitude. Although the primary object of the posse comitatus was to maintain peace and pursue felons under the command of the sheriff, it also was required to obey a summons for the military defense of the country.
In the United States, the posse comitatus was perhaps most important on the Western frontier (there known as a “posse”), and it has been preserved as an institution in many states. Sheriffs and other peace officers have the authority to summon the power of the county, and in some counties it is a crime to refuse assistance. In general, members of a posse comitatus are permitted to use force if necessary to achieve legitimate ends, but state laws differ as to the legal liability of one who in good faith aids an officer who is himself acting beyond his authority.
Another use of the posse comitatus in the United States was the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878, which was passed at the end of Reconstruction (1865–77) in order to prevent the use of the U.S. military for the enforcement of domestic law in the occupied South. The same act was invoked in the 1980s to prevent military forces from being deployed against certain domestic threats, such as drug trafficking and terrorism.
In the second half of the 20th century, the idea of the posse comitatus was influential in the United States among political extremists who argued that no legitimate authority exists above the level of the county. They maintained that federal and even state governments are unlawful and can therefore be lawfully resisted. Inspired by the posse comitatus, they created their own “common law” courts, which they sometimes used to harass political enemies. Many of these activists were affiliated with armed militia groups and preached racist and anti-Semitic ideas.
