Preventive detention,  the practice of incarcerating accused individuals before trial on the assumption that their release would not be in the best interest of society—specifically, that they would be likely to commit additional crimes if they were released. Preventive detention is also used when the release of the accused is felt to be detrimental to the state’s ability to carry out its investigation. In some countries the practice has been attacked as a denial of certain fundamental rights of the accused.
The procedure has been used primarily in civil-law countries, in some of which—particularly France and Belgium—the rights of individuals detained before trial were more carefully protected. In 1970 in France the practice was placed exclusively in the hands of the courts. In Belgium a review of every individual detained in this manner must be held monthly to determine if release would still constitute a threat to society.
Preventive detention is used to a considerable extent in countries ruled by dictators. It was also found in the Soviet Union, particularly in cases in which the accused individuals were perceived as political or security threats to the government. In such countries, where there was often little concern for the protection of individual rights, preventive detention was left almost exclusively in the hands of police and prosecuting authorities. Where there is greater concern for individual rights, the courts have been given control, but critics maintain that the practice in any form does not lend itself to vigorous and continuous protection of individual rights.
In 1984 the U.S. Congress adopted a preventive detention act allowing federal courts to detain arrestees pending trial if the government could show that no release conditions could protect the safety of persons and the community. The act was challenged before the U.S. Supreme Court in United States v. Salerno, decided in 1987. The court held that the preventive detention bill violated neither the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment nor the excessive bail language of the Eighth Amendment. After Salerno, preventive detention laws were adopted in a number of U.S. states.
With the Salerno decision, the notion of preventive detention became available for the first time at a theoretical level. At a practical level, however, little change was caused by the 1984 decision. U.S. courts long recognized that bail could be denied or restricted in capital and other cases where threat of flight was strong. The preventive detention procedure has been used sparingly. Courts may often effectively detain arrestees by setting bail sums low enough not to be constitutionally “excessive” but high enough to make it impossible for the arrestee to gain release on bail. In other cases, bail is granted but with highly restrictive conditions. For example, in 2011 a prominent French politician and international statesman was charged in New York state with sexual assault. He was released on bail in the amount of $1 million but with the condition that he confine himself in a New York apartment under the surveillance of private security guards. See also rights of accused; due process.
