Queen’s Bench Division, also called (during a kingship) King’s Bench Division, formerly Court of Queen’s Bench,  in England and Wales, one of three divisions of the High Court of Justice, the others being the Chancery Division (formerly the Court of Chancery) and the Family Division. Formerly one of the superior courts of common law in England, Queen’s or (during a kingship) King’s Bench was so called because it descended from the English court held coram rege (“before the monarch”) and thus traveled wherever the king went. King’s Bench heard cases that concerned the sovereign or cases affecting great persons privileged to be tried only before him. It could also correct the errors and defaults of all other courts, and, after the close of the civil wars of Henry III’s reign (1216–72), it mainly tried criminal or quasi-criminal cases. In 1268 it obtained its own chief justice, but only very gradually did it lose its close connections with the king and become a separate court of common law.
The Court of King’s Bench exercised a supreme and general jurisdiction over criminal and civil cases as well as special jurisdiction over the other superior common-law courts until 1830, at which time the Court of Exchequer Chamber became the court of appeal from the three superior common-law courts. King’s Bench heard appeals from the Court of King’s Bench in Ireland until the end of the 18th century and exercised important jurisdiction over officials and others by means of prerogative writs—e.g., habeas corpus, certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus. By the Judicature Act of 1873 the court was merged in the Queen’s Bench Division of the High Court of Justice.
The Queen’s Bench Division is now headed by a president who is appointed by the queen upon the recommendation of a special panel convened by an independent Judicial Appointments Commission. The division comprises five specialized courts that deal with specific areas of the law: the Administrative Court, the Admiralty Court, the Commercial Court, the Mercantile Court, and the Technology and Construction Court.
