Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC,  1969 U.S. Supreme Court case that upheld the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) fairness doctrine, stating that if a station makes a personal attack on an individual, it must also give that person an opportunity to respond to the criticism.
The Red Lion case had its origins when author Fred J. Cook criticized U.S. presidential candidate Barry Goldwater in his book, Barry Goldwater: Extremist on the Right (1964). A radio station operated by Red Lion Broadcasting Company in Red Lion, Pennsylvania, ran a 15-minute broadcast by the Reverend Billy James Hargis criticizing Cook. Hargis claimed that Cook had been fired from the New York World-Telegram newspaper for false charges against a New York city official and that Cook, writing for The Nation (which Hargis characterized as having “championed many communist causes”), had attacked Federal Bureau of Investigation director J. Edgar Hoover and the Central Intelligence Agency.
When Cook heard of the broadcast, he demanded free reply time to address the attack. The broadcast station refused to allow Cook to reply to the allegations. On appeal, the FCC declared that the station should give Cook an opportunity to reply to allegations against him. The D.C. Circuit of the Court of Appeals upheld the FCC decision. An appeal was brought to the Supreme Court, which unanimously upheld the lower court’s decision that the FCC had the authority to regulate the electronic media and that the fairness doctrine was both “authorized by statute and constitutional.”
The court held that, because of the scarcity of radio frequencies, there was no First Amendment right for all citizens to own a radio license. However, the court said, there was also no First Amendment right for licensees to monopolize the airwaves. Thus, the government had the authority to require a licensee to share his station with the public, since the right of viewers and listeners was paramount, not the right of broadcasters. Under certain circumstances, the court held, a licensee had to provide reasonable broadcasting time for persons with a view different from that expressed on his or her station. The court found that it was consistent with the First Amendment goal of “producing an informed public capable of conducting its own affairs” to allow persons attacked on a station to respond publicly on the station.
After a series of revisions, the FCC essentially repealed the 1949 fairness doctrine and its corollary personal attack provisions.
