Respondeat superior, (Latin: “that the master must answer”)  in Anglo-American common law, the legal doctrine according to which an employer is responsible for the actions of its employees performed during the course of their employment.
The rule originated in England in the late 17th century and was intended to prevent employers from escaping financial responsibility for the actions of their employees. Respondeat superior was first used to justify a criminal indictment in the mid-19th century, first in England and a short time later in the United States. By the end of the 19th century, there was ample precedent to prosecute corporations under respondeat superior. In 1903 the U.S. Congress passed the Elkins Act, which banned rebates by railroads to businesses that shipped large quantities of goods and contained an explicit statutory clause for corporate criminal liability.
Modern legislation based on respondeat superior imposes both civil and criminal liabilities on organizations. Such statutes are meant to force employers to be vigilant regarding the behaviour of the people who work for them. Corporate liability under respondeat superior generally requires three elements: (1) the agent of the corporation committed the crime, (2) while acting within the scope of the agent’s authority, (3) with an intent to benefit the corporation.
Until the 1960s, corporate criminal liability in the United States was generally limited to instances in which higher-level managers were directly involved in or willfully ignorant of the legal infraction. Throughout the 1970s and ’80s, however, organizational criminal liability was more stringently applied.
However, the advent of the U.S. federal sentencing guidelines in 1991 limited criminal liability in cases in which higher-level personnel were not directly involved and there was a compliance program to help prevent violations. That development, however, sometimes allowed sophisticated organizations to evade liability by shifting blame for illegal actions onto lower-level, supposedly “rogue” employees.
