Restorative justice,  response to criminal behaviour that focuses on lawbreaker restitution and the resolution of the issues arising from a crime in which victims, offenders, and the community are brought together to restore the harmony between the parties. Restorative justice includes direct mediation and conflict resolution between the offender, the victims, their families, and the community. It holds the offender accountable to the other parties while also providing the offender with learning experiences that offer law-abiding lifestyles as realistic alternatives to criminality. American psychologist Albert Eglash is generally credited with first adopting the term “restorative justice” in his 1959 article “Creative Restitution: Its Roots in Psychiatry, Religion and Law,” which was then compared and contrasted in his 1977 article “Beyond Restitution: Creative Restitution” with the retributive justice (punishment-focused justice) and rehabilitative justice (justice focused on personal reform) perspectives.
Restorative justice views crime as more than simply a violation of the law—an offense against governmental authority. It violates human relationships and injures victims, communities, and even offenders. Each party is hurt in different ways, and each has different needs that must be met in order for healing to begin. Crime disturbs society’s sense of trust and often results in feelings of suspicion, separation, and discrimination. Crime creates rifts between friends, relatives, neighbours, and communities. It often produces a hostile relationship where no previous relationship existed. An often-overlooked result of crime is that the victim and offender have a relationship—they have a painfully negative experience in common. Left unresolved, that hostile relationship negatively affects the welfare of both. Justice requires restoration for victims, offenders, and communities affected by crime. To promote healing, society must respond to the needs of victimized parties as well as to the responsibilities of offenders.
Restorative justice also serves as an alternative to retributive justice (which views crime primarily as acts that violate criminal laws established by governments) and rehabilitative justice (which takes a therapeutic approach that addresses an offender’s need for treatment). Essentially, both perspectives concentrate on rules and laws with regard to the actions of offenders. The state is viewed as the victim in both systems, and the offender is held accountable through punishment (in the retributive system) or treatment (in the rehabilitative model). However, the victims become a secondary concern at best, serving generally as witnesses for the state.
Restorative justice, however, considers both primary victims (those directly harmed by an offender’s actions) and secondary victims (those indirectly harmed by the offender’s actions [such as the families of the primary victims and the community at large]). Primary victims often sustain bodily injury, financial loss, and emotional suffering, and the effects of such losses can last up to a lifetime. All primary victims, regardless of their level of victimization, have a need to reclaim a sense of control of their lives and to have their rights vindicated. Moreover, victimization is based on the experience of being wronged by another, and thus victims feel the need for authoritative condemnation of the wrong. Secondary victims may also have a variety of needs. For example, a primary victim’s family may need to replace property or endure medical expenses. The community seeks the reestablishment of order and safety.
Restorative justice also distinguishes between resulting injuries (those caused by the crime itself or its aftermath) and contributing injuries (those that existed prior to the commission of the crime and that may have provoked the crime). Resulting injuries can be physical, such as an injury suffered, or emotional, such as embarrassment or shame. Contributing injuries can include cases in which child abuse victims become victimizers themselves or when abuse of alcohol or other drugs leads to criminal behaviour to support the addiction. These situations are not excuses for criminal behaviour but must be addressed in attempts at healing.
Compared with retributive and rehabilitative justice, restorative justice places a much higher premium on the participation of the principals. Both the victim and the offender take an active role. Victims are allowed to ask questions and have them answered. Offenders are encouraged to understand the harmful consequences of their behaviour. They acknowledge their guilt and take responsibility to make amends. Efforts of the community to repair injuries to victims and offenders are encouraged.
The most important way in which restorative criminal justice differs from retributive and rehabilitative justice is in the outcome of the process. Retributive justice often relieves the offender from the obligation to acknowledge guilt or to repay the victim and community. In contrast, restorative justice seeks to right the wrong that has been committed and repair the damage that has been sustained by victims, offenders, and communities. However, when incarceration is necessary for public safety, it should be part of the resolution. Examples of restorative justice outcomes include restitution, community service, and victim-offender reconciliation.
The most widely used component of restoration is restitution, because the most obvious way to hold offenders responsible for the injuries they cause is for them to make restitution to the victims. A court restitution order usually requires offenders to pay the fair market value of the loss to the victims. They make scheduled payments, usually collected by a criminal justice agency such as a probation department, to be disbursed to victims.
While restitution provides an avenue for the recovery of losses, its real importance lies in the acknowledgment of the wrong and a statement of responsibility. Restitution also helps offenders to confront their guilt in a constructive way, and it helps the community by placing fewer nonviolent offenders behind bars. Advocates of restitution suggest that it results in lower rates of recidivism (a tendency toward chronic criminal behaviour) among offenders.
Another unique benefit of restitution is that it takes the profit out of crime. Restitution is based on the full market value of the item, but criminals rarely receive fair market from stolen items, so they may repay many times what they received. Because profit is often the motivator for committing the crime, removing the profit is a powerful deterrent.
