Ricci v. DeStefano,  case alleging racial discrimination that was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court on June 29, 2009. The court’s decision, which agreed that the plaintiffs were unfairly kept from job promotions because of their race, was expected to have widespread ramifications for affirmative action and civil rights law.
The case arose after the New Haven, Conn., fire department offered a promotional examination to its firefighters in 2003. Seventy-seven firefighters took the exam, but none of the 19 African Americans among them earned results deemed high enough to warrant a promotion. Fearing a lawsuit alleging racial discrimination, department officials discarded the results and determined that they would not promote anyone based solely on the results of the written test. A racial discrimination lawsuit was then brought against the city of New Haven by firefighters—including 18 whites and one Latino—whose test results would have qualified them for promotion.
The man at the centre of the lawsuit was Frank Ricci, a white firefighter who testified that he had studied for several hours a day and had paid a friend to record textbooks onto tape for him so that he could overcome his dyslexia in order to do well on the test. New Haven’s mayor, John DeStefano, was named as one of the respondents in the lawsuit. Attorneys for the city of New Haven argued that it was unfair to perceive the department’s action as racial discrimination because they were trying to comply with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act (1964), which bans discriminatory practices by employers.
As the case wound its way to the Supreme Court, many legal observers believed that final adjudication would provide a landmark precedent. The case received even more attention in May 2009, after Pres. Barack Obama nominated Sonia Sotomayor for the Supreme Court seat being vacated by David Souter, who planned to retire from the court as soon as a replacement could be found. Sotomayor as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit had in 2008 ruled on the case as a member of a three-judge panel. The ruling by that court caused controversy in some quarters because—in a brief, unsigned opinion—it had sided with the lower court’s ruling against the white firefighters without offering much further comment on the case and its potential impact on affirmative action and civil rights law.
In its 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Second Circuit court, arguing that the Latino and white firefighters had been unfairly denied promotions because of their race. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who delivered the opinion of the majority, wrote: “Fear of litigation alone cannot justify the City’s reliance on race to the detriment of individuals who passed the examinations and qualified for promotions. Discarding the test results was impermissible under Title VII.” The dissenting position, written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, held that the white firefighters “had no vested right to promotion. Nor have other persons received promotions in preference to them.”
