Roe v. Wade,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 22, 1973, ruled (7–2) that unduly restrictive state regulation of abortion is unconstitutional. In a majority opinion written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the Court held that a set of Texas statutes criminalizing abortion in most instances violated a woman’s constitutional right of privacy, which it found to be implicit in the liberty guarantee of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (“…nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law”).
The case began in 1970 when “Jane Roe”—a fictional name used to protect the identity of the plaintiff, Norma McCorvey (1947–2017)—instituted federal action against Henry Wade, the district attorney of Dallas county, Texas, where Roe resided. The Supreme Court disagreed with Roe’s assertion of an absolute right to terminate pregnancy in any way and at any time and attempted to balance a woman’s right of privacy with a state’s interest in regulating abortion. In his opinion, Blackmun noted that only a “compelling state interest” justifies regulations limiting “fundamental rights” such as privacy and that legislators must therefore draw statutes narrowly “to express only the legitimate state interests at stake.” The Court then attempted to balance the state’s distinct compelling interests in the health of pregnant women and in the potential life of fetuses. It placed the point after which a state’s compelling interest in the pregnant woman’s health would allow it to regulate abortion “at approximately the end of the first trimester” of pregnancy. With regard to the fetus, the Court located that point at “capability of meaningful life outside the mother’s womb,” or viability, which occurs at about 24 weeks of pregnancy.
Repeated challenges since 1973 narrowed the scope of Roe v. Wade but did not overturn it. In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992), the Supreme Court established that restrictions on abortion are unconstitutional if they place an “undue burden” on a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus is viable. In Gonzales v. Carhart (2007), the Court upheld the federal Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act (2003), which prohibited a rarely used abortion procedure known as intact dilation and evacuation. In Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt (2016), the Court invoked its decision in Casey to strike down two provisions of a Texas law requiring abortion clinics to meet the standards of ambulatory surgical centres and abortion doctors to have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital. Four years later, in June Medical Services L.L.C. v. Russo (2020), the Court invoked Whole Woman’s Health to declare unconstitutional a Louisiana statute that was, as the majority noted, nearly identical to Texas’s admitting-privileges law.
In May 2021 the Supreme Court agreed to review in its October 2021 term a lower court’s decision to strike down a Mississippi state law, adopted in 2018, that banned most abortions after the 15th week of pregnancy, well before the point of fetal viability. Although the law was plainly unconstitutional under Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, Mississippi lawmakers passed the measure in the hope that an inevitable legal challenge would eventually make its way to the Supreme Court, where a conservative majority of justices would overturn or drastically reduce the scope of those decisions. The single question that the Court agreed to consider in the case, Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, was whether all pre-viability abortions are unconstitutional.
In May 2021 Texas adopted a law, S.B. 8, that effectively banned almost all abortions beyond the time at which fetal cardiac activity (a “fetal heartbeat”) can be detected, or about the sixth week of pregnancy. The law was unlike several other fetal-heartbeat statutes passed in other states (and subsequently struck down in the courts) in that it shifted responsibility for enforcing the ban from state officials to private citizens. S.B. 8 empowered any citizen to file a civil suit against anyone who performs an abortion, or “aids or abets” the performance of an abortion, of a fetus more than six weeks old. The citizen plaintiffs, if successful in their suits, would be awarded $10,000 plus legal costs (to be paid by the defendants). The law made no exceptions for rape or incest. Because state officials would not be enforcing the law, they presumably could not be named as defendants in any legal action requesting a judge to block enforcement of the law or to declare it unconstitutional.
Two days before S.B. 8 was to take effect (September 1) a group of abortion providers in Texas filed an emergency request with the Supreme Court, asking that it block the law or vacate an appeals court ruling that had halted litigation of the providers’ challenge, Whole Women’s Health v. Jackson, in federal district court. After three days a slim majority (5–4) of the Court announced its decision not to intervene, because the providers’ application “presents complex and novel antecedent procedural questions” and because “it is unclear whether the named defendants in this lawsuit”—including two state officials and a prominent anti-abortion activist—“can or will seek to enforce the Texas law against the applicants in a manner that might permit our intervention.” The majority stressed, however, that in declining to block the law it was not passing any judgment on the law’s constitutionality.
In 1998, having undergone two religious conversions, McCorvey publicly declared her opposition to abortion. However, in the documentary AKA Jane Roe (2020), a dying McCorvey claimed that she had been paid by antiabortion groups to support their cause.
