Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia,  legal case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (5–4) on June 29, 1995, that the University of Virginia’s denial of funding to a Christian student magazine constituted viewpoint discrimination in violation of the free speech clause of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The ruling reinforced the tendency of courts in the United States to treat religious speech as a subset of free speech.
The Student Activities Fund at the University of Virginia was built from mandatory student fees and was designed to support a variety of extracurricular student activities. Any organization that wished to receive funds had to become a “Contracted Independent Organization” (CIO) and had to include in all written materials to third parties notification that the group was independent of the university and that the university was not responsible for the CIO. Fund guidelines governed and controlled the disbursement of monies to CIOs. The guidelines stated that the purpose of the fund was to support a range of extracurricular activities and that the money had to be administered in a manner consistent with the educational purpose of the university as well as with state and federal law.
Ronald Rosenberger was a University of Virginia student who created Wide Awake Productions as a CIO. The group published a magazine, Wide Awake, in order to facilitate discussion of religious and philosophical topics within an atmosphere of tolerance of Christian viewpoints. In addition, the group published a newspaper, the Christian viewpoint of which was clear from the first issue. The fact that Wide Awake Productions was a valid CIO is important, because if the group had been a religious organization, it would not have qualified for CIO status under fund guidelines. These guidelines stipulated that religious organizations were those whose purposes were to practice devotion to acknowledged ultimate realities or deities.
When Rosenberger requested monies from the fund to subsidize the publication of Wide Awake, officials rejected his application for aid on the ground that the magazine was a religious activity pursuant to its guidelines. The student then filed suit on behalf of Wide Awake Productions, claiming that the denial of funding solely on the basis of the publication’s religious editorial viewpoint violated the group’s rights to freedom of the press and freedom of speech, the right to free exercise of religion, and equal protection of the law.
A federal trial court, in granting the university’s motion for summary judgment, held that that the denial of support did not constitute viewpoint discrimination and that officials’ concern about the group’s religious activities was a sufficient justification to deny the request for funds. On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed that university officials did not violate the group’s rights, because they had a compelling interest in preserving strict separation of church and state.
In a judgment authored by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Supreme Court reversed the lower courts’ decisions. The Supreme Court ruled that the denial of funding to the publication imposed a financial burden on Wide Awake Production’s speech amounting to viewpoint discrimination. Acknowledging that the fund was a forum, the court cited its earlier decision in Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District (1993), in which it had found that a school board that made meeting space available to a large variety of groups could not exclude religious organizations based on the religious nature of their speech, because doing so amounted to viewpoint discrimination. The court reasoned in Rosenberger that, because the university provided funding to other groups for journalistic pursuits, it had to do the same for groups that were religious in nature.
The Supreme Court next rejected the university’s claim that the guidelines and the accompanying restrictions were based on content, not viewpoint. The court responded that, with regard to religion, while the distinction between content and viewpoint was difficult to draw, religion served as a perspective and a standpoint for discussion. Consequently, the court was convinced that university officials had discriminated against the group because of its views, not because of the content of its publication. In discussing the distinction between content and viewpoint discrimination, the court explained that content discrimination could be permissible if it preserved the purposes of the limited open forum but that viewpoint discrimination was impermissible when the speech in question was within the forum’s limitations.
Turning to the establishment clause issue, the court pointed out that the university’s program was neutral toward religion, because the purpose of the fund was to open a forum for speech and to support valid student groups. Deciding that the mandatory fee to support the fund was not a tax, the court concluded that, because the program ensured its neutrality by treating each CIO as a private group and not as part of the university, officials would not have violated the establishment clause had they made the funds available.
