Sadki Na grades,   (1454), rules of land tenure established in Thailand by King Trailok of Ayutthaya (1448–88) to regulate the amount of land a man could own.
Before Trailok’s reform, the rulers of the Thai kingdoms did not exert effective control over the land extending beyond the immediate environs of the capital city. Beyond that perimeter, local chiefs held power and central authority was loosened. In many cases, only nominal homage was paid to the central ruler. Centralization of power and increased efficiency of government was desired by many rulers. Trailok’s reforms left a lasting mark on Thai administrative and social history. These reforms remained the basis of administration until the 19th century.
Prior to the institution of the grades, the amount of land a man might own varied according to his status. Trailok’s reform reorganized the system, established rules defining the various levels of status, and fixed the amount of land a man could own.
The Sadki Na grade, or the number of dignity marks a person had, determined his rank or importance. The highest Sadki Na grade ranged from 400 to 10,000 marks, enabling the highest officialdom to own from 1,000 to 4,000 acres (400 to 1,600 hectares) of land. In the middle range of 25 to 400 marks were officials appointed by the higher officers of state, who might own from 160 to 1,000 acres of land. The lowest grade, up to 25 marks, might own from 10 to 160 acres. In essence, the system provided the lowest class of the population with at least 10 acres of land.
The Sadki Na grades provided a framework for the society. A man was worth so much in accordance with his Sadki Na grade. Legal fines were determined by a man’s grade. Compensation was similarly determined by grade. The 10 acres of land provided for each member of even the lowest class meant that no person need starve. Likewise, the gradations determined the income of government officials. Salaries were not introduced until the 19th century. Until that time, officials had been expected to live off the amount of land prescribed by the Sadki Na grade. In conjunction with other reforms, the Sadki Na institution provided Siam with a stable but open economic and social order.
