Servitude,  in Anglo-American property law, a device that ties rights and obligations to ownership or possession of land so that they run with the land to successive owners and occupiers.
In contemporary property law, servitudes allow people to create stable long-term arrangements for a wide variety of purposes, including shared land uses; maintaining the character of a residential neighbourhood, commercial development, or historic property; and financing infrastructure and common facilities. The owner of property burdened by a servitude cannot unilaterally terminate the servitude or transfer the property free from the servitude without the consent of all the beneficiaries. Thus, whether or not they expressly agree to its terms, subsequent owners and occupiers are bound to follow the servitude. Land-use arrangements implemented by servitudes range from simple driveway easements and covenants prohibiting nonresidential use of subdivision lots to complex declarations that provide for the physical and governmental infrastructure for condominiums, planned developments, or private towns.
In the United States there are three basic types of servitudes: easements, covenants, and profits. Easements allow the right to enter and use, for a specified purpose, land that is owned by another (e.g., the right to install and maintain an electric power line over someone else’s land). Covenants obligate a landowner to do something for, or give a landowner the right to receive something from, someone else. Examples of covenants are agreements between owners of a parcel of land that they will pay assessments to a homeowner’s association and agreements with an owner of a business on a parcel of land that another parcel of land in the area will not be used by a competing business. Profits give someone the right to enter and remove natural resources (e.g., sand and gravel) from the land of another. Servitudes usually arise out of agreements between owners and users but may also be created by prescription (i.e., by open use of someone else’s property for a specified period of time) or by eminent domain (i.e., government appropriation of private property for public use). Agreements to create servitudes are subject to a statutory requirement (Statute of Frauds), which requires that they be created by a written instrument.
Servitudes usually, but not always, involve two or more parcels of land, one of which is burdened and the other benefited by the servitude. The burdened parcel is called the “servient estate” and the benefited parcel the “dominant estate.” Benefits and burdens that run with the land are “appurtenant” (i.e., they must be used for specific property) and cannot generally be detached from the land with which they are associated. Because appurtenant benefits and burdens cannot be assigned (transferred) or delegated to others, they remain with the owner or possessor of the dominant and servient estates. Unless the parties intended to create more expansive rights, an appurtenant easement cannot be used to benefit property other than the dominant estate, and the identity and maximum size of the dominant estate are fixed at the time the easement is created.
Benefits and burdens that are not tied to ownership or possession of a particular piece of land are called “in gross.” Benefits acquired by governmental bodies, conservation and preservation organizations, pipeline owners, railroads, and utility companies are often in gross. Easement burdens are never in gross, but covenants to supply water, utilities, or other services to a parcel of land frequently involve a burden in gross. These covenants are classified as servitudes when the benefit is appurtenant to and runs with the land. Historically, the ability to create servitudes with benefits in gross has been severely limited, but the need for transportation and utility easements that serve individuals and businesses and the need for covenants that serve conservation, preservation, and governmental purposes led to a relaxation of the limits in the 19th and 20th centuries. Although the ability to create and transfer benefits in gross may still be restricted in some U.S. states, the modern view is that benefits in gross may be freely created and assigned.
In subdivisions and planned developments, burdens and benefits are often reciprocal. Each lot or unit is burdened by servitudes for the benefit of all the others. In most U.S. states, if a project developer represents to prospective purchasers, either explicitly or implicitly, that all the property in the project will be subjected to servitudes to carry out a development plan, the plan becomes binding when the first lot is sold subject to the servitudes. Unless the developer has expressly reserved the right to withdraw unsold property from the plan, all the developer’s remaining land in the project is burdened by implied reciprocal servitudes. In subdivisions or other projects developed according to a general plan, all lot owners have the right to enforce the reciprocal servitudes unless the right has been exclusively granted to a property-owners association or is otherwise expressly denied to the individual owners.
Easements allow individuals to acquire rights to use land without having to purchase an ownership interest. The easement holder acquires the right to make specified uses of the property, and the owner retains the right to make any other uses of the property that do not unreasonably interfere with the use authorized by the easement. Easements are commonly used to provide for driveways, private roadways, parking, utility lines, irrigation ditches, and pipelines. Historically, easements have been used to create rights-of-way for railroads, streets, and highways, but more often full ownership interests are acquired for those kinds of facilities. Easements continue to be used to authorize encroachments, seasonal flooding, and recreational activities. Because the easement provides only limited rights of use and the servient owner regains full rights to use the property once the easement terminates, buying an easement is usually less expensive than buying an ownership interest in land. For example, if a railroad purchases an easement for its right-of-way, it cannot use the easement for other purposes if it abandons the railroad tracks, but if it purchases an ownership interest, it can use the right-of-way property for any legal purpose.
Easements can be either exclusive or nonexclusive. If the easement is exclusive, the servient owner is excluded from making some uses of the property that would otherwise be allowed. The extent of the exclusion depends on the intent of the parties who created the easement but commonly extends to granting easements or licenses to others for similar purposes. The servient owner may also be excluded from using the part of the land where the easement is located or from using facilities constructed for use of the easement. If the easement is nonexclusive, the servient owner may grant similar use rights to others and make any other use of the property subject to the easement, so long as there is no unreasonable interference with the use rights authorized by the easement. Typically, driveway easements are nonexclusive, allowing use by both the dominant and the servient owners. Pipeline easements are typically exclusive, in that the servient owner has no right to use the pipeline, but may also be nonexclusive, in that the servient owner retains the right to grant easements to others to run pipelines in the same area. Easements for underground pipelines and overhead transmission lines are typically nonexclusive, in that the servient owner retains the right to make uses of the surface that do not interfere with reasonable use of the pipelines and transmission lines.
Covenants are used in contemporary land development for a wide variety of purposes. They include affirmative covenants, which require the landowner to make payments, provide services, or render some other performance, and negative covenants, which require the landowner to refrain from doing something. Negative covenants that restrict the uses of a parcel of the land are called restrictive covenants. Typical affirmative covenants require landowners to pay assessments for common-area maintenance and covenant-enforcement purposes. Restrictive covenants are commonly used to limit property to residential uses and to prohibit building without the approval of an architectural control committee. An example of a negative covenant that is not a restrictive covenant is one that limits the right of a landowner and his successors to sue an adjacent landowner for nuisance.
Statutes in most U.S. states authorize the creation of so-called “conservation easements” to be held by conservation organizations and governmental bodies. The name is misleading, however, because the primary function of these agreements is to limit the development of the servient estate rather than to authorize the easement beneficiary to enter and use the land. Most conservation easements are more accurately described as “conservation servitudes” because they combine elements of easements and covenants, such as granting access rights to the easement holder for monitoring, education, or fund-raising purposes and imposing both affirmative and negative obligations on the servient owner to ensure that the conservation purpose is carried out.
Profits, which authorize the removal of timber, minerals, oil, gas, game, or other substances from a parcel of land, are used primarily in the extractive industries, in the timber industry, and for recreational hunting and fishing. Rights to take water from a spring or well are characterized as easements in some states and as profits in others. Profits are not universally used to create rights for nonowners to take natural resources from the land. Leases, rather than profits, are often used to create rights to extract oil and gas and to cut timber. Some states recognize mineral estates that allow for the ownership of solid minerals independently of ownership of the rest of the land. The owners of mineral estates generally have a right to go through the surface estate to gain access to the minerals.
Modern European civil law is derived from Roman law, which divides real servitudes into rural and urban servitudes. The terms rural and urban refer to the nature of the obligation rather than the location of the servitude. Rural servitudes (i.e., those owed by one estate to another) include various rights-of-way; urban servitudes (i.e., those established for convenience) include building rights in neighbouring properties, such as drainage and encroachment rights, and rights to light, support, and view.
