Sing Sing, in full Sing Sing Correctional Facility,  maximum-security prison located in Ossining, New York. In use since 1826, it is one of the oldest penal institutions in the United States. It is also among the most well-known in the country, especially notable for its harsh conditions in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Originally known as Mount Pleasant Prison, it was constructed in the village of Sing Sing on the east bank of the Hudson River, some 30 miles (48 km) north of New York City. It was designed to provide additional prison space and to replace Newgate Prison. Construction was undertaken in 1825 by convict labourers under the supervision of Elam Lynds, warden of Auburn State Prison. He officially became head of the new prison when it opened in 1826, though it was not completed until 1828. The initial facility had 800 cells. The prison population rose in the mid-19th century, resulting in more construction. The four-story complex was soon six stories, and the prison eventually housed more than 1,600 inmates. Because most of the early convicted criminals traveled by boat to Sing Sing, the phrase “up the river” came to mean going to prison.
One of the notable visitors to the prison was Alexis de Tocqueville, author of Democracy in America. The French government sent him and Gustave de Beaumont to the United States in 1831 to gather information about the American penal system. The two men were amazed at the total subjugation under which prisoners worked and the administrative power the warden wielded at Sing Sing.
Lynds resigned as warden of Sing Sing in 1830 and returned to Auburn in 1838. He was asked to leave that prison a year later after the death of a prisoner who was punished severely for feigning illness. Despite this record, Sing Sing rehired Lynds in 1843.
Whippings and floggings were commonplace punishments at Sing Sing. Frequently used was the cat-o’-nine-tails, a cruel whipping contraption whose lashes were often tipped with metal or barbs; its use was finally abolished by the New York State legislature in 1848. In addition, while Lynds was warden, inmates were expected to refrain from making noise, which included talking. With the advent of the electric chair in 1891, Sing Sing became notorious for its executions. Although the electric chair was developed at neighbouring Auburn, almost all executions within the state were carried out at Sing Sing until 1963. The infamous “death chair” was later moved to Green Haven prison.
Sing Sing was also the site of reforms that affected the national penal system. Reformer Thomas Mott Osborne, who developed his penology theories while voluntarily incarcerated for a year at Auburn, served as Sing Sing’s warden in 1914–15 and 1916. But his immediate, sweeping changes were assailed, and he resigned under intense political pressure. During his tenure, however, the first psychological work with inmates began. More reforms were instituted under Lewis Edward Lawes, who served as warden from 1920 to 1941. He notably improved the living conditions within the prison and allowed inmates to participate in sports.
In 1901 the residents of Sing Sing village changed its name to Ossining. They wanted to distance, if not disassociate, the town from the notorious prison. For that same reason, in 1970 the state renamed the prison Ossining Correctional Facility. The change did not stick, however. Local merchants got the previous name restored in 1983, thinking the cachet of “Sing Sing”—by then the prison was part of American popular culture, frequently appearing in movies, TV shows, and books—would translate into tourism.
