Sipuel v. Board of Regents,  case in which the U.S. Supreme Court on January 12, 1948, ruled unanimously (9–0) to force the University of Oklahoma law school to admit  Ada Lois Sipuel, the school’s first African American student. Sipuel became the first African American woman to attend an all-white law school in the South, earning a master’s degree from the University of Oklahoma in 1951.
In 1946 Ada Lois Sipuel was denied admission to the University of Oklahoma law school on the basis of her race. Sipuel sued the school, alleging that because the state of Oklahoma did not provide a comparable facility for African American students under the doctrine of “separate but equal,” she would have to be admitted to the university. Sipuel was represented by lawyer and civil rights activist Thurgood Marshall, the attorney for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and lawyer Amos T. Hall. Losses in the lower courts prompted Sipuel to take her case to the Supreme Court, which ruled that Oklahoma must provide instruction for African Americans that was equal to that of whites.
The state of Oklahoma responded by creating the Langston University School of Law, which was made up of a few Senate rooms in Oklahoma’s capitol. Sipuel again took her case to the courts, which ruled that the accommodations for her were not equal to those of whites and that the University of Oklahoma must admit her to the genuine law school.
On June 18, 1949, Sipuel—now married, pregnant, and with the married name of Fisher—was finally able to enter the law school of her choice. However, she was forced to sit on a chair marked “colored” and was separated from the rest of the class by a barrier. At the school cafeteria she had to eat in a separate area, which was chained off from the rest of the cafeteria and guarded. Despite those obstacles, Fisher graduated in 1951 and soon afterward began practicing law in her hometown of Chickasha, Oklahoma. In 1992 Oklahoma Governor David Walters appointed Ada Lois Sipuel Fisher to the Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma.
