Smith-Hughes Act, formally National Vocational Education Act,  U.S. legislation, adopted in 1917, that provided federal aid to the states for the purpose of promoting precollegiate vocational education in agricultural and industrial trades and in home economics. Although the law helped to expand vocational courses and enrollment, it generally did not live up to the lofty aspirations of its supporters. Historians have also pointed to its unintended effects in differentiating the secondary-education curriculum in ways that often reinforced existing class- and race-based inequalities.
In the late 19th century, a variety of groups in the United States began to advocate for the creation of new vocational-education programs in schools, reflecting the then widespread belief in the moral, educative, and practical value of work. Many supporters of vocational education, including businessmen and labour unions, saw it as a solution to problems of skilled-labour shortages and unemployment in a rapidly industrializing society. Employers hoped it would weaken the power of labour unions over the training of industrial workers, whereas workers saw it as an opportunity for individual advancement and as a means of dignifying labour itself. Many philanthropists and moral reformers regarded vocational training as an opportunity to inculcate the moral value of work, which they feared was being eroded by modern society. In contrast, many educators and pedagogical reformers saw vocational education as a way to put into practice new teaching methods and philosophies that emphasized cultivating children’s interests through active learning.
In the early 20th century, supporters of vocational education began to advocate more systematic programs and to emphasize its economic and utilitarian values more forcefully. Business groups, for example, began to argue that American economic progress and global competitiveness demanded public funding of trade instruction. In 1905 the Massachusetts state legislature appointed the Massachusetts Commission on Industrial and Technical Education, also known as the Douglas Commission, which recommended in its final report that the state expand technical and industrial training. However, it did not clearly address the question of whether such education should take place in existing public schools or in newly created vocational schools. During the next decade, Massachusetts and many other states, as well as individual cities, established both separate technical and trade schools and vocational programs within existing public school systems.
The findings of the Douglas Commission were embraced by a diverse group of reformers who promoted vocational education at local, state, and national levels. In 1906 they formed the National Society for the Promotion of Industrial Education (NSPIE) to lobby on behalf of vocational education and to coordinate the efforts of supporting groups, including the American Federation of Labor, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Education Association, and social welfare reformers.
Eight years later, the congressionally appointed Commission on National Aid to Vocational Education declared that national vocational education was an urgent necessity. Vocational training, it argued, would vitalize general education and democratize schooling by adapting it to the real needs of children, promote industrial efficiency and national prosperity, decrease labour and social unrest, and promote a higher standard of living for workers. It recommended federal grants to the states to promote vocational education, with particular focus on training vocational teachers. It proposed legislation that was later introduced by two of the commission’s members, Sen. Hoke Smith and Rep. D.M. Hughes, both of Georgia, and passed by Congress (with minor modifications) in 1917 as the National Vocational Education Act, subsequently known as the Smith-Hughes Act.
As one of the first federal grant-in-aid programs, the Smith-Hughes Act provided federal aid on a matching basis to states and established requirements regarding how the money was to be used. It created the Federal Board of Vocational Education to oversee the distribution of funds and approve state plans. The act required every participating state to designate or create a state-level body that would act as a liaison between the federal board and local districts; it thereby augmented the power of state governments at a time when they were beginning to expand their oversight of local schools in new ways.
Although much of the advocacy had centred on industrial education, Congress included agriculture and home economics within its definition of vocational subjects. In framing the act, one area of controversy had been the vocational education of girls: should they be trained to work in industry, the home, or both? The final bill reached a compromise of sorts, providing aid for industrial classes in female-dominated trades such as millinery and garment making but ultimately emphasizing and expanding domestic instruction for women’s work in the home. States and localities were permitted to decide for themselves whether vocational education should be provided in separate schools or within existing public schools, but they tended to the latter as a growing consensus emerged on the ideal of a comprehensive high school offering differentiated instruction to all students under the same roof.
The Smith-Hughes Act succeeded in expanding vocational education throughout the country. Subsequent federal laws extended and expanded aid for vocational education as national interest in economic development and youth training intensified during the Great Depression, World War II, and beyond. The proportion of students enrolled in the programs eventually leveled off, however, and it  remained far lower than supporters had hoped, rarely reaching 20 percent. Later assessments of the law were mixed, as some studies showed that vocational education did not necessarily produce economic benefits for the individual. Critics also pointed out that the job training provided in these programs often lagged behind the actual needs of industry.
Historians have noted the unintended consequences of the Smith-Hughes Act and related laws, particularly the increased differentiation of the curriculum and the sorting of students in schools that had previously embraced the ideal of a single common education for all. Vocational education not only separated students by gender but also sorted them into tracks that tended to reinforce the differential treatment of students based on class and race. African American students, for example, were often steered into vocational education programs on the assumption that they were not capable of academic training or would not be hired for jobs that required it. Historians have also pointed out that the programs helped to spread the ideology of “vocationalism,” the view that the curriculum should be guided by economic priorities and values.
