Statutory rape,  in many jurisdictions, nonforced sexual relations between an adult and an individual who legally is not old enough to consent to the behavior. Laws, though variable, define when an individual is capable of making sexual activity decisions.
The laws about statutory rape are complex and diverse. Most address the age at which a minor can agree to sex (consent), the acceptable age difference for sexual relations between a minor and adult, and to what extent the adult is in a position of authority (e.g., teacher, coach) over the child. Although laws first arose from concern about girls having sexual intercourse with men, most laws now are gender neutral.
The United States has defined a higher age of consent than in most other countries for a minor to have sex with an adult. In most states, a 16-year-old can legally give consent for sex with an adult. Some states also specify that to qualify as statutory rape, in addition to the victim being under the age of consent, there needs to be an age difference of at least 2 to 5 years between the youth and adult. Generally when a youth is 12 years old and younger, the sexual activity is considered child abuse. In contrast, in half of the jurisdictions in Europe, a 14-year-old can legally give consent for sex with adults.
Different cultural norms further complicate society’s perception of and response to statutory rape. In some cultures, it is completely acceptable for young girls to have sexual relations with older adult men. When adults are interested in sexual relations with minors, they may give gifts and money to youth and their families, and this is perceived as acceptable and a sign of attention or love. In contrast, in other cultural circles, this same behavior is often described as "grooming the victim,” or seducing a minor by forming a bond with her or him and then introducing a sexual component to the relationship. Furthermore, some minors may not view themselves as victims, often saying that they are in love with the adult and therefore do not think a crime has been committed.
