Suicide bombing,  an act in which an individual personally delivers explosives and detonates them to inflict the greatest possible damage, killing himself or herself in the process. Suicide bombings are particularly shocking on account of their indiscriminate nature, clearly intending to kill or injure anyone within range of the explosion, the victims being mostly unsuspecting civilians (though political figures and military personnel are frequently the main targets), and because of the evident willingness of the bombers to die by their own hands. Virtually all suicide bombings are linked to political causes or grievances. Unlike suicidal tactics born of desperation in war, such as Japan’s kamikaze attacks during World War II, suicide bombing is deliberately employed by terrorists for calculated political effect. Indeed, because suicide bombers have the ability to move, avoid security measures, and choose their targets, they have been likened to a human “smart bomb” (or “poor man’s smart bomb”).
The damage inflicted by suicide bombings is both physical and psychological, and to inflict maximum damage the bombers rely heavily on the element of surprise. Surprise is generated by turning the everyday into a weapon. For instance, suicide bombers often wear their explosives underneath their clothing, carry them in backpacks, or even hide them in bicycle frames. Frequently, to inflict even greater damage, suicide bombers drive vehicles packed with explosives. Bomb sizes have ranged from less than 100 grams (just over three ounces) in the case of the so-called underwear bomber, who attempted to bring down an airliner in the United States in 2009, to more than one ton in a car bombing that killed more than 200 people in Bali, Indonesia, in 2002.
Accessible and stable high explosives such as trinitrotoluene (TNT) have been available for more than a century, but suicide bombing is a more recent phenomenon. Modern suicide bombers can trace their roots to radical 19th-century anarchists, or “dynamiters,” who espoused a doctrine of action and a “propaganda of the deed.” Few dynamiters, however, sought to destroy themselves with the same weapons that they directed against monarchs and other leaders. Contemporary suicide bombing began in 1981 in Lebanon. However, it achieved worldwide notoriety in 1983, first with an attack against the U.S. embassy in Beirut that killed 63 people and then with simultaneous car bombings of U.S. and French military barracks, also in Beirut, that killed 299 more. These attacks, mounted by the Shiʿi Islamic group Hezbollah, were credited with forcing the withdrawal of Western military forces from Lebanon.
Since 1983, suicide bombing has become a favourite terrorist tactic of insurgent groups from Sri Lanka to Chechnya to Afghanistan. One indication of this growing preference is the number of attacks, which rose from 1 in 1981 to more than 500 in 2007. The use of suicide bombing has grown for three primary reasons. First, suicide bombing is almost impossible for security forces to prevent. Bombers such as the three second-generation Pakistani Britons and one young immigrant from Jamaica who killed 52 people in the London bombings of 2005 are almost unstoppable once they are committed to die and kill others. Second, suicide bombing generates publicity. Media attention is like oxygen to terrorists, and suicide bombings receive enormous news coverage owing to the willingness of the bombers to die for a cause and the shocking damage inflicted indiscriminately against targets and bystanders alike—as happened in the assassination in 1991 of Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and 16 others by a woman associated with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. Third, a successful suicide bombing requires little expertise and few resources beyond a bomb and someone willing to carry it. Therefore, for groups determined to spread terror, suicide bombing is much more cost-effective than other tactics such as hostage taking, which requires considerably greater investment in resources, planning, and training. Instruction manuals, videos, and other training materials, some of them available online, have allowed groups like the London bombers to construct bombs with little guidance.
The growth in suicide bombing has also been linked with the rise of militant religious-inspired terrorist violence. However, religion is not the sole motivation for suicide bombing. American political scientist Robert Pape argued that, prior to 2003, the group that used suicide bombing the most was the Tamil Tigers, a largely secular ethnic separatist group from Sri Lanka. Nevertheless, suicide bombings since 2003 have been mounted almost exclusively by groups espousing religious causes. One compelling explanation for the role of religion involves justification and persuasion. As a means to justify indiscriminate killing and to overcome the natural aversion against taking one’s own life, militant groups (and the religious leaders and interpreters who speak for them) use faith to elevate their causes to religious crusades. In this way the act of suicide bombing becomes not a social or religious aberration but rather a sacred duty and obligation. At various times and for various reasons, communities have been manipulated into sanctifying those “martyred” in suicide bombings and have become a source of new recruits. The reasons can include resentment against a perceived occupier or some other historical and social injustice as well as economic and social incentives for the families of martyrs.
Religion may justify suicide bombing on one level, but on another level the act springs from the motivation of the individual bomber. Studies have shown that many suicide bombers, particularly in developed societies, are not deranged or wild-eyed fanatics with nothing to live for; indeed, a significant number of bombers have come from income and education levels well above their countries’ norms. Another broad trend, noticeable in the numerous suicide bombings in Iraq and Afghanistan, has been the recruitment of individuals who are physically or mentally ill, impoverished, suggestible, or alienated in some way from their society. Individual purposes or motivations can range broadly, from revenge for the death of a family member (for instance, the female suicide bombers, or “Black Widows,” in Chechnya) to outrage against an occupying power (for instance, in Iraq or the Palestinian territories) or against some incident (e.g., the abuse of prisoners at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq) to coercion or even the payment of money to one’s family (as has occurred in Afghanistan and elsewhere). Neither altruism nor anomie figures much in such individual calculations.
