Sumptuary law,   any law designed to restrict excessive personal expenditures in the interest of preventing extravagance and luxury. The term denotes regulations restricting extravagance in food, drink, dress, and household equipment, usually on religious or moral grounds. Such laws have proved difficult or impossible to enforce over the long term.
Sumptuary laws are of ancient origin, and numerous instances are to be found in ancient Greece. The Spartan inhabitants of Laconia, for example, were forbidden to attend drinking entertainments and were also forbidden to own a house or furniture that was the work of more elaborate implements than the ax and saw. The possession of gold or silver was also forbidden to the Spartans, their legislation permitting only the use of iron money. A system of sumptuary laws was extensively developed in ancient Rome; a series of laws beginning in 215 bc governed the materials of which garments could be made and the number of guests at entertainments and forbade the consumption of certain foods.
Sumptuary laws were enacted in many countries of Europe from the Middle Ages, though with no more effectiveness than in ancient Greece or Rome. In France, Philip IV issued regulations governing the dress and the table expenditures of the several social orders in his kingdom. Under later French kings the use of gold and silver embroidery, silk fabrics, and fine linen was restricted. In England during the reign of Edward II a proclamation was issued against the “outrageous and excessive multitude of meats and dishes which the great men of the Kingdom had used, and still used, in their castles.” Besides the standing regulations governing dress, Edward III in 1336 tried to restrict merchants and the servants of gentlemen from eating more than one meal of flesh or fish per day. In 1433 an act of the Scottish parliament prescribed the lifestyle of all social orders in Scotland, even going so far as to limit the use of pies and baked meats to those who held the rank of baron or higher. Legislation of this type was brought to the American Colonies in the 17th century but was generally not strictly enforced there.
In feudal Japan sumptuary laws were passed with a frequency and minuteness of scope that had no parallel in the history of the Western world. In the early 11th century, for instance, an imperial edict regulated the size of houses and imposed restrictions on the materials that could be used in their construction. During the Tokugawa period (1603–1867) sumptuary laws were passed in bewildering profusion, regulating the most minute details of personal life.
In the 20th century, democratization, industrial mass production, and the rise of consumer-oriented societies all combined to render sumptuary laws obsolete in most countries.
