trademark,   any visible sign or device used by a business enterprise to identify its goods and distinguish them from those made or carried by others. Trademarks may be words or groups of words, letters, numerals, devices, names, the shape or other presentation of products or their packages, colour combinations with signs, combinations of colours, and combinations of any of the enumerated signs.
By indicating the origin of goods and services, trademarks serve two important purposes. They provide manufacturers and traders with protection from unfair competition (one person representing or passing for sale his goods as the goods of another), and they provide customers with protection from imitations (assuring them of a certain expected quality). In terms of the protection of the rights of trademark holders, the law in most countries extends beyond the rule of unfair competition, for a trademark is considered the property of the holder; and, as such, unauthorized use of the trademark constitutes not only misrepresentation and fraud but also a violation of the holder’s private property rights.
In most countries, registration is a prerequisite for ownership and protection of the mark. In the United States, however, the trademark right is granted by the mere use of the mark; registering the mark provides the owner only with certain procedural advantages and is not a prerequisite for legal protection.
It is not necessary for the mark to be in use before a registration application is filed, although most countries require applicants to have a bona fide intent to use the mark after registration. Formerly, the United States was one of the few countries requiring actual use prior to registration. Under the Trademark Law Revision Act of 1988, the United States permits registration upon application attesting to an intent to use the trademark in the near future.
In many countries, ownership of a trademark is not acknowledged until the mark has been registered and gone uncontested for a given period of time, so as to afford protection to a prior user of the mark. Even after that period has passed, the prior user may move to have the registration canceled. After a certain number of years (from three to seven, depending on the country), the registration and ownership become uncontestable.
For a mark to be registered, it must be distinctive. In many cases a mark, when first brought into use, may not have been distinctive, but over time the public may have attached a secondary meaning to it, forming a specific association between the mark and the product, thus making the mark distinctive, hence registrable.
When a question of infringement (unauthorized use) of a trademark arises, the primary legal question addressed in court is whether the accused infringer’s use of the mark is likely to confuse the purchasing public. In most countries, including the United States, protection against infringement extends to goods or services similar to those covered by the registration. In countries following British law (some 66 nations), an infringement action can, however, be brought only for the precise goods identified in the registration.
For a long time the rights of a trademark could not be transferred separately from the business to which it was attached. Now, however, because trademarks are deemed property, they may be sold, inherited, or leased, as long as such a transfer of rights does not deceive the public. In most countries a public notice of such a transfer must be given. A common form of transfer is international licensing, whereby a trademark holder allows the use of his mark in a foreign country for a fee. Often in such instances the foreign licensee must meet certain product quality requirements so that his use of the mark does not deceive the consumer.
There are some instances in which the right of trademark may be lost. The two most serious reasons for loss of trademark are the failure to use a registered trademark and the use of a trademark that becomes a generic term. In many countries if a trademark is not used within a certain number of years, the rights of protection of the mark are forfeited. In the United States when a trademark becomes a generic term in the public’s mind (such as Aspirin, Kleenex, or Linoleum) the courts may decide that the trademark holder no longer has rights of protection. In other countries the courts are not concerned if the mark is considered generic, and the original trademark holder retains all rights and privileges of the mark.
Although each nation has its own trademark law, there are increasingly multinational efforts to ease registration and enforcement practices. The first international agreement was the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of 1883, which has been regularly revised ever since. It sets minimum standards for trademark protection and provides similar treatment for foreign trademark holders as for nationals. Approximately 100 countries are party to the Paris Convention. Uniform trademark laws have been enacted by the African Intellectual Property Organization in 13 French-speaking African countries, the Andean Common Market in Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, in the Benelux and Scandinavian countries, and under the Central American Treaty on Industrial Property (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua). In addition, nearly 30 countries (mostly European but including Morocco, Algeria, Vietnam, and North Korea) adhere to the Madrid Agreement, which provides for a single application process through filing in a central office located in Geneva.
