Transnational threats,  security threats that do not originate in and are not confined to a single country. Terrorism, organized international crime, and the possible acquisition of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) by nongovernmental groups are commonly cited as examples of transnational threats.
Heightened concern about transnational threats in the late 20th century was a consequence of advances in transportation and telecommunications. Commercial air travel reduced dramatically the time and effort needed to for criminal and terrorist networks to move operatives around the globe, and mobile telephones, e-mail, and the Internet made it much easier for geographically dispersed groups to communicate and coordinate their activities.
Terrorism provides an example of how modern technological advances have turned a once-local problem into one of international dimensions. Politically motivated violence was, of course, not unknown prior to the late 20th century, but it typically took the form of attacks on nearby targets. The groups involved were usually confined to a single country or geographic area and operated independently of one another. Although they posed a problem for local authorities, such groups rarely spread far from their source or joined forces with other terrorist organizations.
From the later 20th century, however, terrorist groups increasingly used technology to extend their reach. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) coordinated the activities of nearly a dozen terrorist groups, carrying out operations around the world. From the 1990s, the al-Qaeda network spawned cells operating in dozens of countries, with al-Qaeda leaders communicating to followers through e-mail and social networks as well as through audio and video recordings distributed via the Internet. The group also became adept in the online transfer of funds from secure bank accounts to operatives worldwide. Before the advent of computers and digital technology, such coordination and global organization were difficult, if not impossible.
The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing economic crisis in eastern Europe and the post-Soviet states contributed significantly to the increasing number of transnational threats by creating an atmosphere in which organized crime flourished. The Russian mafia, virtually unknown in the West before 1991, quickly became a scourge of European and U.S. law-enforcement agencies. From the late 1990s, the Russian mob dealt heavily in financial fraud, human trafficking, and murder for hire on a global scale. Economic uncertainty in the wake of the Soviet collapse also raised the possibility that chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons might fall into the hands of terrorists or rogue states. In many former Soviet republics, the materials used in the construction of nuclear weapons were poorly guarded and monitored, and parts of the stockpiles of nuclear materials remained unaccounted for.
To counter such threats, countries have increased cooperation, especially in the fields of law enforcement and intelligence, in which the sharing of information between countries can help track terrorists and organized-crime groups.
