Tyrannicide,  in ancient Greece and Rome, the killer or would-be killer of a tyrant. The term may also refer to the act of killing a tyrant. Tyrannicides were often celebrated in antiquity, and some Classical states even legislated to exempt from prosecution those who killed a tyrant or would-be tyrant.
The archetypal tyrannicides were Harmodius and Aristogiton of Athens, who in 514 bce planned to murder the tyrant Hippias, son of Peisistratus. They succeeded only in killing the tyrant’s brother Hipparchus before being killed themselves, but they nevertheless received great posthumous honours from the Athenian populace. Harmodius and Aristogiton’s deed did not end the Peisistratid tyranny—Hippias ruled for three more years, and their act was, furthermore, personally motivated, a response to an insult by Hippias (according to the historian Herodotus) rather than the product of political conviction—but they became known in popular tradition as a symbol of resistance to tyranny.
The laws on the killing of tyrants passed in the Classical period make the idea appear uncomplicated: if anyone aims at tyranny or succeeds in becoming a tyrant, he can be killed with impunity. In practice, however, the motives of tyrannicides were rarely politically pure. In many cases the term tyrant was used to justify an unedifying cycle of political murders as would-be rulers declared their rivals to be tyrants and murdered them. Some tyrannicides, however, have been credited with disinterested motives; under the influence of Plato’s condemnation of tyranny, for example, some students of philosophy chose to risk their lives against tyrants. Thus, Clearchus, tyrant of Heracleia on the Black Sea, was killed in 352 bce by a group led by his court philosopher Chion. The tyranny did not fall—Clearchus was succeeded by his brother—but the tyrannicides appear to have acted from genuine political conviction.
The image of the paranoid tyrant who fears assassination at every moment derives principally from the works of the Roman statesman Cicero. In De officiis (On Duties), Cicero suggested that all tyrants inevitably meet death at an assassin’s hand and that killing a tyrant is not morally wrong. Cicero emphasized these ideas as a means of justifying the killing of tyrants in his own time, and the conspirators against Julius Caesar in 44 bce presented their deed as both the overthrow of a tyrant and the restoration of the Roman Republic. In the early Roman Empire, conspiracies against the emperor were common, but although the conspirators usually claimed to be removing a tyrant and restoring the Republic, in general they aimed simply at replacing the ruler. From this point on, arguments about the killing of tyrants came to centre on the ethical nature of rulership—the point at which constitutional rule became tyrannical—and the legitimacy of opposition to it. Yet antiquity continued to provide a fertile source of inspiration for would-be tyrannicides of all kinds.
