Ulster Defence Association (UDA),  loyalist organization founded in Northern Ireland in 1971 to coordinate the efforts of local Protestant vigilante groups in the sectarian conflict in the province.
Originally based in the Shankill Road area of Belfast, the UDA was responsible for political murders of Roman Catholics and prominent republicans, though it claimed responsibility for most killings under a pseudonym, the Ulster Freedom Fighters. The UDA was banned by the British government in 1992. In October 1994, in response to a self-described “complete cessation of all military activities” by the Irish Republican Army (IRA), the UDA joined with other loyalist paramilitary organizations in declaring a cease-fire. Sporadic violence continued, however, into the early 21st century. In 2007—two years after the IRA ended its armed struggle—the UDA renounced violence and announced that it was also disarming. In 2010 officials proclaimed that all of the organization’s weapons had been decommissioned.
At its height in the 1970s, the UDA claimed to have between 15,000 and 40,000 members and served as both a paramilitary force and a fund-raising organization for the unionist cause, using both legal and criminal activities (such as racketeering) to procure funds. In 1978 the UDA established a political think tank, the New Ulster Political Research Group, which advocated a negotiated independence for Northern Ireland, a policy at variance with mainstream unionism. Skeptical of traditional unionist politicians (it did not allow members of the British Parliament or clergy to join) and separated from them by its staunchly working-class identity, the UDA replaced the New Ulster Political Research Group with its own political party, the Ulster Loyalist Democratic Party (ULDP), in 1981. The ULDP called for a devolved parliament for the province within the United Kingdom, a bill of rights, and an amnesty for political prisoners. In 1989 the party changed its name to the Ulster Democratic Party (UDP). Led by Gary McMichael, son of a murdered UDA man, the UDP won enough electoral support to participate in the multiparty peace talks that led to the Good Friday Agreement (April 1998), but it did not secure any seats in subsequent elections to the new Northern Ireland Assembly. In 2001 the UDP disbanded.
