United States Court of Appeals,  any of 13 intermediate appellate courts within the United States federal judicial system, including 12 courts whose jurisdictions are geographically apportioned and the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, whose jurisdiction is subject-oriented and nationwide.
Each regional Court of Appeals is empowered to review all final decisions and certain interlocutory decisions of district courts within its jurisdiction, except those few decisions that are appealable directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. A Court of Appeals may also review and enforce the orders of some federal regulatory agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). The Courts of Appeals typically sit in panels of three judges, and cases are decided by majority vote. The courts conduct their reviews on the basis of the record of the trial proceedings and typically do not hear witnesses independently or otherwise receive evidence. Their reviews are mostly limited to points of law, not fact. All decisions of the courts of appeals are subject to discretionary review or appeal in the Supreme Court.
The United States has 94 judicial circuits, above which there are 12 regional Courts of Appeals: District of Columbia Circuit, for Washington, D.C.; First Circuit, for Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Puerto Rico; Second Circuit, for Vermont, Connecticut, and New York; Third Circuit, for New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and the Virgin Islands; Fourth Circuit, for Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina; Fifth Circuit, for Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas; Sixth Circuit, for Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky, and Tennessee; Seventh Circuit, for Indiana, Illinois, and Wisconsin; Eighth Circuit, for Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Arkansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, and South Dakota; Ninth Circuit, for California, Oregon, Washington, Arizona, Nevada, Idaho, Montana, Alaska, Hawaii, and certain Pacific islands; Tenth Circuit, for Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Kansas; and Eleventh Circuit, for Georgia, Florida, and Alabama.
The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, created by an act of Congress in 1982, hears appeals from U.S. district and territorial courts primarily in patent and trademark cases, though it also hears appeals in cases in which the United States or its agencies is a defendant, as in alleged breaches of contract or in tax disputes. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit is located in Washington, D.C.
