Warrant,  in law, authorization in writing empowering the bearer or bearers  to perform an act or to execute an office. The term is applied to a great variety of documents, most commonly judicial or quasi-judicial warrants, of which the most common are for arrest and for search.
A warrant is necessary if an arrest is to be considered legal, except in situations in which arrest without warrant is recognized by law or statute. In the ordinary case, the warrant is issued at the behest of a complainant who provides an affidavit setting forth facts sufficient to satisfy the belief that an offense has been committed and that the person accused is the guilty party. Usually the facts stated must be sworn to as within the direct knowledge of the complainant. Hearsay information may be a sufficient basis for issuing a warrant, but only if the affidavit contains enough information to assess the credibility of the hearsay informant and to supply a basis for the conclusions drawn. The warrant must identify the person to be arrested, but, if the person’s name is unknown, a fictitious name may be substituted (a so-called John Doe warrant); in such cases a physical description of the person is required. Since the late 1990s, so-called John Doe DNA warrants have also been issued, with the DNA profile of the offender serving as the physical description. The legality of a warrant and, hence, of the arrest may be tested by a civil suit for false imprisonment or, in common-law countries, by a habeas corpus proceeding or by similar pretrial hearings.
The issuance of search warrants is governed by many of the same limitations as the issuance of arrest warrants. The descriptions of the property to be seized or of the place to be searched must be so precise that the officer charged with the execution of the warrant will be left with no discretion. Statutes ordinarily define the types of property subject to seizure; some of them restrict these categories to such objects as stolen property, weapons, and gambling equipment, while others permit the seizure of any evidence of criminal activities found during a proper search. Other judicial warrants include escape warrants, issued for the recapture of escaped prisoners, and warrants of commitment, issued to incarcerate a prisoner either before or after trial.
Other types of warrants include tax warrants, which provide the authority to collect taxes, and land warrants, transferable certificates issued by the government entitling the holder to a specific tract of public land.
