Watts Riots of 1965,  series of violent confrontations between Los Angeles police and residents of Watts and other predominantly African American neighbourhoods of South-Central Los Angeles that began August 11, 1965, and lasted for six days. The immediate cause of the disturbances was the arrest of an African American man, Marquette Frye, by a white California Highway Patrol officer on suspicion of driving while intoxicated. Although most accounts now agree that Frye resisted arrest, it remains unclear whether excessive force was used to subdue him. The riots resulted in the deaths of 34 people, while more than 1,000 were injured and more than $40 million worth of property was destroyed. Many of the most vivid images of the riots depict the massive fires set by the rioters. Hundreds of buildings and whole city blocks were burned to the ground. Firefighters were unable to work, because police could not protect them from the rioters.
Public officials and the news media offered conflicting interpretations of the Watts Riots in their immediate aftermath. Some conservatives and many city officials claimed that the violence had resulted from wanton lawlessness, and they pointed to the large number of minority men living in the inner city who had criminal records and to the influx of “outsiders” from the South. They observed that looters took far more goods from stores than they could possibly find useful and that it was irrational to burn down one’s “own” neighbourhood. Some suggested that the riots were an insurrection fostered by urban gangs or by the Black Muslim movement, which the mainstream press then regarded as a radical cult. Others suggested that police-community relations in South-Central Los Angeles had long been uneasy and that those tensions had exploded into rioting. Finally, many federal officials and some reporters explained the riots as a protest against the poverty and hopelessness of life in the inner city, and they described the challenges of joblessness and the lack of basic services in South-Central Los Angeles. That interpretation of the riots dovetailed effectively with President Lyndon B. Johnson’s “war on poverty” programs, which were then being introduced in cities across the country. The war on poverty thus seemed to be a response to the Watts Riots, and the riots seemed to demonstrate the need for the war on poverty.
Despite that apparent synergy, South-Central Los Angeles was slow to recover from the damage done during the riots. In later years some media reports suggested that the blight of the area was entirely due to the riots, ignoring the fact that the community’s poverty and lack of infrastructure had long predated the violence. Nevertheless, today the Watts Riots are typically viewed as the community’s angry response to deprivation and neglect, and they remain a vivid collective memory, particularly in Los Angeles but also nationally.
