Wilmington Ten,  10 civil rights activists who were falsely convicted and incarcerated for nearly a decade following a 1971 riot in Wilmington, North Carolina, over school desegregation. Wrongfully convicted of arson and conspiracy, the Wilmington Ten—eight African American high-school students, an African American minister, and a white female social worker—were victims of the racial and political turmoil during America’s civil rights era.
Wilmington’s modern racial unrest began when the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., canceled his visit to speak at the all-black high school, Williston Senior High School, in Wilmington on April 4, 1968. Instead, he stayed in Memphis, Tennessee, where he was then killed. Although April 5 began with peaceful protests of King’s murder by African American high-school students in Wilmington, the following three days were filled with violent rioting that ended only when 150 National Guardsmen occupied the city.
Until 1969 Wilmington had three high schools: all-white New Hanover and Hoggard and the African American Williston Senior High School. Although the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education had struck down the “separate but equal” ruling of Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), many Southern school boards resisted integration for over a decade before it was finally instituted. When desegregation came in the summer of 1969, African American students and teachers were reassigned to New Hanover and Hoggard, while Williston was closed (later to become a desegregated junior high school). The closure of Williston stunned the African American community, which had taken great pride in the school, and the sudden presence of African American students in the formerly all-white schools brought resentment from both sides. African American students who had been active in athletics and clubs at Williston were excluded from such activities at New Hanover and Hoggard. Taunts and attacks resulted in fights, and police presence was constant. The high-school unrest became citywide and grew into rioting and arson, including the burning of the school board’s building.
In January 1971 hundreds of African American students boycotted the schools. The white pastor of Gregory Congregational United Church of Christ, Eugene Templeton, offered his integrated church as a gathering place and school alternative. On February 1, 1971, the national United Church of Christ’s Commission on Racial Justice sent the young Reverend Benjamin Chavis to Wilmington to organize and provide structure for the students. Chavis delivered fiery speeches denouncing segregation and demanding social justice. Images of Chavis speaking to crowds of African Americans with raised fists dominated local news.
Soon members of a white supremacist group, The Rights of White People (ROWP), a Ku Klux Klan affiliate, arrived. Heavily armed, the ROWP held Klan-like meetings in a public park, ratcheting up tension. African American protesters marched repeatedly to City Hall, requesting a citywide curfew to stop the gunfire that night riders aimed at Gregory Congregational. Curfew was denied.
On February 6, 1971, Mike’s Grocery, a convenience store a few hundred yards from Gregory Congregational, was firebombed. Responding police and firefighters were met with sniper fire, which they returned, killing an African American teenager, 17-year-old Steven Corbett, who was armed with a gun. There was a perception that snipers were in or near the church. The next day a white man with a pistol, Harvey Cumber, was killed in his truck near the church by persons unknown. Rumours of guns, dynamite, and bomb making in Gregory Congregational circulated. Mayor Williams requested assistance from the National Guard and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and a curfew was finally declared.
By March police had compiled a list of 16 people suspected of having either conspired or participated in the firebombing and shooting. Ultimately 10 were arrested and convicted of felonious burning and conspiracy to assault responding emergency personnel, based on the testimony of three African American teenagers. The Wilmington Ten—nine African American men (Chavis, Willie Vereen, Wayne Moore, Marvin Patrick, William [“Joe”] Wright, Reginald Epps, Connie Tindall, James McKoy, and Jerry Jacobs) and a white social worker (Anne Sheppard Turner) were sentenced in 1971. All were high-school students except Chavis and Turner. Their story gained international attention as Amnesty International publicized and protested their status as political prisoners. Writer James Baldwin, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Andrew Young, and many others condemned their convictions and long sentences. In 1978 thousands of protesters marched in Washington, D.C., demanding the release of the Wilmington Ten.
North Carolina Governor James Hunt commuted their sentences in 1978, and, though he refused to pardon them, the Wilmington Ten were all released by 1979. In 1980 the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals voided the convictions on the basis of prosecutorial misconduct by Assistant District Attorney Jay Stroud, who had coached and bribed the witnesses and altered the written statement of the primary witness, Allan Hall. Three key witnesses also recanted. On December 31, 2012, North Carolina Governor Beverly Perdue officially pardoned the Wilmington Ten, saying that their sentences were “tainted by naked racism.”
