Bartolomé Bermejo, also called Bartolomé de Cárdenas,  (born c. 1440, Córdoba [Spain]—died c. 1495, Zaragoza?), painter, a cultivator of the Flemish style, who was considered the finest painter in Spain before El Greco. Bermejo helped introduce Renaissance style to Spain, and his work was emulated by many painters of his era.
Little is known of Bermejo’s early activity. By the late 1460s he was living in Valencia. His earliest surviving work is an altarpiece painting of St. Michael commissioned for the parish church of Tous (1468). He worked for three years (between 1474 and 1477) in Aragon, where he had been commissioned to paint the altarpiece of Santo Domingo de Silos for the church in Daroca. Although Bermejo’s contract stipulated that he would face excommunication if he did not complete the work on time, he arranged an appendix to the contract that would allow another artist to finish it for him. He then renegotiated the contract in 1477 and completed the work himself. The finished panel, which depicted the enthroned figure of Santo Domingo, contained Gothic elements. Under the influence of the Flemish masters, these elements gradually disappeared as he became more skilled in the use of foreshortening, in depiction of details, and in the resolution of difficult problems in perspective. Bermejo moved to Barcelona in the mid 1480s, where he collaborated with Jaime Huguet, the principal master of Catalan Gothic painting.
The work that demonstrates most clearly Bermejo’s mastery of Renaissance techniques is the Pietà of 1490 in the Barcelona Cathedral. It is widely considered his finest work. The painting lacks gold in the background (present in earlier works). Instead, a landscape under a stormy sky is painted very much in the manner of the Flemish master Rogier van der Weyden; it is rich in detail, colour, and life and features the small intricate figures of butterflies, birds, and lizards. The figure of the donor (Luis Desplá, canon of Barcelona Cathedral), who is seen kneeling to the left of the central group in this picture, is considered one of the finest portraits painted in Europe in this period. Some scholars have attributed the uniqueness of the painting to the influence of Desplá, a humanist.
