Camille Pissarro, in full Jacob-Abraham-Camille Pissarro,  (born July 10, 1830, St. Thomas, Danish West Indies—died Nov. 13, 1903, Paris, France), painter and printmaker who was a key figure in the history of Impressionism. Pissarro was the only artist to show his work in all eight Impressionist group exhibitions; throughout his career he remained dedicated to the idea of such alternative forums of exhibition. He experimented with many styles, including a period when he adopted Georges Seurat’s “pointillist” approach. A supportive friend and mentor to influential artists such as Paul Cézanne and Paul Gauguin, he was described by many who knew him as “Father Pissarro.”
Pissarro was the third son of a Jewish merchant of French, originally Portuguese, descent. His family lived above their shop on Charlotte Amalie, the main street of St. Thomas. When Camille was 12 years old, his parents sent him away to a school in Passy, near Paris. The young Pissarro showed an early talent for drawing, and he began to visit the collections of the Louvre.
At age 17 he returned to St. Thomas, where his father expected him to enter the family business. Pissarro was more interested in sketching at the harbour, however, and, after meeting the visiting Danish painter Fritz Melbye, he sailed with the older artist to Venezuela in November 1852. Later, Pissarro said he had “abandoned all I had and bolted to Caracas to get clear of the bondage of bourgeois life.” While in Caracas, Pissarro made many sketches of life on the streets. He returned to St. Thomas in August 1854. This time his parents finally realized that no amount of argument would change their son’s determination to be a painter, and so in the fall of 1855 he left home for the last time, bound for Paris.
Pissarro arrived in time to see the contemporary art on display at Paris’s Universal Exposition, where he was strongly attracted to the paintings of Camille Corot. He began to attend private classes at the École des Beaux-Arts in 1856, and in 1861 he registered as a copyist at the Louvre. He also attended the Académie Suisse, a “free studio,” where he met future Impressionists Claude Monet, Paul Cézanne, and Armand Guillaumin. Through Monet, he also met Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Alfred Sisley.
In these early years in France, Pissarro painted scenes of the West Indies from memory, and he found guidance from Melbye’s brother Anton. Indeed, when he first showed work at the Paris Salon of 1859, Pissarro called himself “Pupil of A. Melbye,” a title he continued to use until 1866. He was also taught informally by Corot, who urged him to paint from nature. Reflecting the influence of Corot, Pissarro’s early paintings usually include a path or river receding in perspective, as well as figures—generally viewed from the back—that give an overall sense of scale. His early works are blonde and green in tonality, however, in contrast to the silvery tonality of Corot’s work.
During this period Pissarro spent time in rural areas such as Montmorency, La Roche-Guyon, and Pontoise, where he could find ample subject matter for landscape painting. This established a lifelong pattern of working outside Paris while also frequently staying in the city. About 1860 he began a relationship with Julie Vellay, his mother’s maid, and in 1863 their first child, Lucien, was born. (The couple married in London in 1871; in all, they would eventually have eight children.)
Pissarro became more and more opposed to the standards of the École des Beaux-Arts and the Academy throughout the 1860s, and he occasionally took part in lively debates with younger artists such as Monet and Renoir at the Café Guérbois. Ten years older than such artists, Pissarro was seen as a father figure, and his fierce arguments about egalitarianism and the inequities of the system of juries and prizes impressed everyone. Although he showed his work at the Paris Salon, he and his colleagues came increasingly to recognize the unfairness of the Salon’s jury system as well as the disadvantages relatively small paintings such as their own had at Salon exhibitions.
Discussions in the art world were interrupted, however, by the outbreak of the Franco-German War in 1870. Pissarro left for London, where he met up with Monet and the dealer Paul Durand-Ruel. Pissarro lived in south London for a time and painted scenes, such as The Crystal Palace, London (1871), of the newly emerging suburbs there. Many years later, he wrote: “Monet and I were very enthusiastic over the London landscapes. Monet worked in the parks, while I, living in Lower Norwood, at that time a charming suburb, studied the effects of fog, snow, and springtime.” On his return to France and his house in Louveciennes, Pissarro discovered that much of the work in his studio had been destroyed by Prussian soldiers.
In 1872 Pissarro moved back to Pontoise, where he gathered a small circle of painters around him, including Guillaumin, and, most importantly, Cézanne, to whom Pissarro demonstrated his method of painting patiently from nature. These lessons caused Cézanne to change his entire approach to art. Later, in 1902, he said of his mentor: “As for old Pissarro, he was a father to me, a man to consult and something like the good Lord.”
