Dosso Dossi, original name Giovanni Francesco di Niccolò di Luteri or Giovanni Luteri,  (born c. 1486, Tramuschio, Mirandola [Italy]—died  1542, Ferrara, duchy of Ferrara [Italy]), late Italian Renaissance painter and leader of the Ferrarese school in the 16th century. Very little is known about his early life, and his artistic influences and training have long been open to speculation. His byname comes from the name of the family estate near his place of birth.
Dosso is first recorded in 1512, in Mantua, where he was commissioned to do a large painting for the palazzo of San Sebastiano. By that time he must have been in Venice and absorbed the art of Giorgione, whose style dominates Dosso’s Nymph and Satyr. He may also have seen some of the early works of Titian. His style was founded on the romantic approach to landscape, which reached its highest expression in Giorgione’s Tempest, but Dosso also added something of Titian’s richness and a personal quality of fantasy, which reflects his knowledge of the works of the Ferrarese painters Cosmè Tura, Francesco del Cossa, and Ercole de’ Roberti. He worked in Florence in 1517 and must have come once more under the influence of Titian, whose early mythologies were painted for Dosso’s own patron Alfonso I of Ferrara. In service to Alfonso, Dosso visited Venice and Mantua (1516–19). In addition to work for his patron, he was commissioned to paint Virgin and Child in Glory for the Modena Cathedral (1518–21).
Although the event is not supported by documentary evidence, it is probable that Dosso traveled to Rome about 1520 with his brother Battista, who was also a painter. In Rome Dosso became acquainted with the works of Michelangelo, Giulio Romano, and Raphael, whose late style greatly influenced him. In Dosso’s later works there is an unearthly light falling on melancholy figures arranged in a romantic dreamland, as can be seen in Mythological Allegory (c. 1529–32). Dosso was the friend of the great Ferrarese poet Ludovico Ariosto, who celebrated him in Orlando Furioso as one of the nine great living painters. Dosso’s most famous work, The Sorceress Circe (c.. 1530), has been seen as almost an illustration to Ariosto. After about 1530, Dosso frequently collaborated with his brother Battista, so it is difficult to know which painter is responsible for which elements of their joint work. Together they worked in Pesaro, Trento, and Ferrara.
