Ellsworth Kelly,  (born May 31, 1923, Newburgh, New York, U.S.—died December 27, 2015, Spencertown, New York), American painter, sculptor, and printmaker who was a leading exponent of the hard-edge style, in which abstract contours are sharply and precisely defined. Though often associated with Minimalism, Kelly preceded the movement by a decade.
Before serving in the army during World War II, Kelly studied technical art (the only type of art training his parents agreed to fund) for a year (1941–42) at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn. When he returned from his tour of duty, Kelly studied at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (1946–48) and then went abroad to Paris to study at the École des Beaux-Arts (1948–49). During his years in Paris he made contact with many artists—Jean Arp, Constantin Brancusi, Joan Miró, and Alexander Calder, among others—who had an influence on his developing style. His interest at that time was in Byzantine and Renaissance art and Romanesque architecture as well as in the Surrealist movement’s practice of automatic drawing, which relied on spontaneity and chance. He used that method for inspiration when creating early abstract works such as Colors for a Large Wall and the series titled Spectrum Colors Arranged by Chance (both 1951), checkerboards of colour, black, and white squares assembled in a random order.  Kelly had his first one-man show in Paris in 1951. He returned to the United States in 1954 and lived among other artists, including Agnes Martin, Jack Youngerman, Robert Indiana, Lenore Tawney, and James Rosenquist.
The New York City art world in 1954 was dominated by Abstract Expressionism. Like the Abstract Expressionists, Kelly sometimes worked on a very large scale. He diverged from that movement, however, in his rejection of painterliness, or showing any sign of the painter’s hand in his paintings. Instead, his paintings typically are flat and consist of adjacent geometric panels of smooth uninflected colour (e.g., Blue Green Red [1963]). Kelly’s freestanding sculptures, which he began creating in the late 1950s, are, like his paintings, geometric objects of bold solid colours and are made of industrial materials such as steel and aluminum (e.g., Gate [1959]). He had his first solo exhibition in the United States at the Betty Parsons Gallery in 1956 and was regularly included in many group exhibitions thereafter (e.g., “Young America 1957,” Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City; “Sixteen Americans,” Museum of Modern Art, New York City [1959]). In the 1960s Kelly also began applying his approach to colour, form, and line to printmaking.
As Kelly’s reputation grew, he received numerous commissions for large-scale sculptures, such as for the Transportation Building in Philadelphia (1957) and the New York State Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair (1964). When he moved to upstate New York in 1970, Kelly began creating large-scale outdoor sculptures and public art works that appear in museum collections around the world and in public spaces in cities such as Chicago (Curve XXII, also called I Will [1981]) and Berlin (Berlin Totem [2008]). 
Kelly’s work was the subject of numerous solo exhibitions and won him many honours. Some of his exhibitions include retrospectives at the Museum of Modern Art (1973), the Whitney Museum of American Art (1982), and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (1996). In 1974 he was elected to the National Institute (now Academy) of Arts and Letters and received the Painting Prize from Art Institute of Chicago. In addition, he was elected to the French Legion of Honour (1993). He was the recipient of the Japan Art Association’s Praemium Imperiale prize for painting (2000) and the National Medal of Arts (2012). In 2015 the Blanton Museum of Art in Austin, Texas, accepted a design by Kelly for a freestanding stone building with coloured glass windows and other interior features designed by the artist. The structure, called Austin, was constructed posthumously and opened to the public in 2018. Described as a “secular chapel” by Kelly’s partner of 30 years, Jack Shear, the building is the only work of its kind by Kelly.
