Fyodor Stepanovich Rokotov,  (born 1735/36, Moscow, Russia—died Dec. 12 [Dec. 24, New Style], 1808, Moscow), Russian artist and prominent master of chamber portraits that were close to the ideas of sentimentalism and Rococo. He is credited with inventing a uniquely personal style in Russian portrait painting.
Though he was a serf or freed serf by birth, Rokotov’s art showed no trace of his humble origins. Rather, the faces in his paintings were marked by a refinement not found in other portraits of the time. Although he experienced dizzying successes that secured for him imperial orders, the title of academician, and ennoblement, he never forgot his origins.
Rokotov’s rapid rise began under the patronage of Count Ivan Shuvalov, the founder of Russia’s first university in Moscow (1755) and of the Academy of the Arts in St. Petersburg (1757), who was a favourite of Empress Elizabeth. It was thanks to Count Shuvalov that the 20-year-old Rokotov was afforded the opportunity to paint the portrait of the heir to the throne, Grand Duke Pyotr Fyodorovich (later Peter III), and in 1760, at the count’s order, Rokotov was accepted into the academy. In 1762, at the presentation of his portrait of Peter III, who had just ascended the throne, Rokotov was made a court painter. A year later he painted the portrait of the new empress, Catherine II (1763), which was to become a model for later portraits and was much copied. Rokotov began to find it difficult to handle the mounting number of orders, at times having to work simultaneously on some 50 portraits. Finally in 1765 he was accorded the title of academician. But, at the height of his fame, Rokotov unexpectedly left St. Petersburg for the more provincial Moscow, using his newly gained rank to distance himself from the encroachments of the imperial court on his artistic freedom.
In Moscow he avoided, to the extent he could, all official requests for paintings but readily painted members of Moscow society in small intimate portraits. They were shoulder-length or waist-length portraits, their hues founded on delicate faded shades, lit so softly that outlines were blurred, the canvas showing through the fragile colours. In these portraits the forms lost their objective character, their brittleness becoming a reflection of the delicacy of the subject’s spiritual life. This precious essence within the images does not change from portrait to portrait: the soul that governs Rokotov’s imagination is ideal and ingrained in the most varying features. At times his portraits were marked with the stamp of social rank, in accordance to the wishes of the patron—as can be seen, for instance, in the portrait of Countess Yekaterina Orlova, one of Catherine II’s young ladies-in-waiting, depicted in befitting attire and with an impenetrable haughty, yet civil, facial expression (c. 1779). More rarely, when the fragile ideal happens to coincide with reality, it receives an open penetrating embodiment, as in the portrait (1772) of the 18-year-old Aleksandra Struyskaya, with whose family Rokotov was friendly, and the young Prince Ivan Baryatinsky (1780s).
The particularity of Rokotov’s painting—refined hues, delicate lighting, the music of elusive lines and curves—shows to a large extent the influence of the Italian painter Pietro Rotari, who introduced Rococo painting to St. Petersburg, where he lived from 1756 to 1762. Rokotov took seriously the refined language that expressed Rococo’s elegant play of feeling and endeavoured to use it as a living expression of his times. In his final years Rokotov painted portraits of women almost exclusively.
