Gentile Bellini,  (born  c. 1429, Venice [Italy]—buried Feb. 23, 1507, Venice), Italian painter, member of the founding family of the Venetian school of Renaissance painting, best known for his portraiture and his scenes of Venice.
Gentile was trained by his father, Jacopo Bellini, a painter who introduced Renaissance concerns and motifs into Venice. At the beginning of Gentile’s career, he worked with his father and his brother, Giovanni, and Jacopo’s influence may be seen in Gentile’s early Madonna. As an independent artist, Gentile contracted with the officers of the San Marco School in 1466 to decorate the doors on the case of their organ. These paintings represent four saints, colossal in size and designed with the harsh austerity and daring perspective that characterized the style of his brother-in-law, Andrea Mantegna, then the most prominent painter of the Paduan school. The same influence may be seen in Gentile’s Banner of Blessed Lorenzo Giustiniani (1465), with its sharp incisive outlines and stiff drapery. In 1474 Gentile was commissioned to execute a series of paintings for a room in the Doges’ Palace in Venice.
In 1479 the doge (“duke”) of Venice sent him to Constantinople as a painter to the court of the Sultan Mehmed II. The most important of the extant works that Gentile painted there is the Portrait of Mohammad II (c. 1480), a masterful characterization of the shrewd, cultivated ruler. In his pen-and-gouache drawing Seated Scribe (1479–80), Gentile employs a flat patterned style similar to that of the Turkish miniatures that influenced such later works as his Portrait of Doge Giovanni Mocenigo (1478–85).
Among Gentile’s best-known works are the scenes of Venice painted for the School of San Giovanni Evangelista, one of the many religious confraternities of the city. Those works deal with episodes related to a relic of the Holy Cross that the school owned. Those events are all but lost in the panorama of Procession in St. Mark’s Square (1496) and the Miracle of the True Cross at the Bridge of S. Lorenzo (1500), huge canvases painted with painstaking attention to the smallest detail and crowded with small, rather rigid figures, including many portraits. A similar but lesser-known work is his St. Mark Preaching in Alexandria (1493–1507), which was finished after Gentile’s death by his brother, Giovanni, one of the best Venetian painters of the Renaissance. Gentile’s paintings are of great interest today primarily as records of Venetian life and architecture during the 15th century.
