Jacopo Bellini,  (born c. 1400, Venice—died c. 1470, Venice), painter who introduced the principles of Florentine early Renaissance art into Venice.
He was trained under the Umbrian artist Gentile da Fabriano, and in 1423 he had accompanied his master to Florence. There the progress made in fidelity to nature and in mastery of classic grace by such masters as Donatello and Ghiberti, Masaccio and Paolo Uccello offered Jacopo further inspiration.
By 1429 Jacopo was settled at Venice and had established himself as the city’s most important painter. The use of gold pigment in highlights of such works as his “Madonna” (c. 1438; Accademia, Venice) shows that Jacopo long retained elements derived from Byzantine art, while the Child’s rich robes and the patterned background of angels reveal his continued interest in the higher decorative style in which he was trained, conventionally called International Gothic. The modeling of the figures, the confident rendering of folds of cloth, and the accurate perspective, however, indicate an excellent understanding of the progressive art of 15th-century Florence. In the life-sized “Crucifixion” (Museo di Castelvecchio, Verona), the spare and sombre scene strictly conforms to the Florentine Renaissance style of Masaccio and repudiates the rich colouring and courtly grace of Bellini’s earlier known works.
More important than his paintings are his two books of drawings (c. 1450). The Louvre in Paris and the British Museum in London each own one of these sketchbooks. The drawings depict a great variety of scenes, and artists used them as models for compositions well into the 16th century. In such drawings as the “Nativity,” the “Flagellation,” and “St. John the Baptist Preaching,” Jacopo experimented with linear perspective and was among the first to make figures diminish in space using rules of perspective formerly applied only to depictions of architecture. The “Crucifixion” (British Museum, London) is among Jacopo’s boldest compositional experiments. Possibly for the first time in art, the three crosses are viewed at an angle instead of frontally, and the soldiers’ backs are turned to the viewer, lending a spontaneity and immediacy rare in Italian art of the time. Jacopo’s great influence upon Venetian art was heightened through the work of his sons, Gentile and Giovanni, and his son-in-law, Andrea Mantegna, all of whom were prominent painters in the vicinity of Venice.
