Lorenzo Lotto,  (born c. 1480, Venice [Italy]—died  1556, Loreto, Papal States), late Renaissance Italian painter known for his perceptive portraits and mystical paintings of religious subjects. He represents one of the best examples of the fruitful relationship between the Venetian and Central Italian (Marche) schools.
In the earlier years of his life, he lived at Treviso, and, although he was influenced by the Venetians Giovanni Bellini and Antonello da Messina, he always remained somewhat apart from the main Venetian tradition. His earliest dated pictures, the Madonna and St. Peter Martyr (1503) and the Portrait of Bishop Bernardo de’ Rossi (1505), both in Naples, have unmistakable Quattrocento traits in the treatment of the drapery and landscape and in the cool tonality.
Between 1508 and 1512, Lotto was in Rome, where he was influenced by Raphael, who was painting the Stanza della Segnatura in the Vatican palace. In the Entombment (1512) at Jesi and the Transfiguration (c. 1513) at Recanati, Lotto abandoned the dryness and cool colour of his earlier style and adopted a fluid method and a rich, joyful colouring.
After 1513 Lotto lived primarily in Bergamo, where his style matured. His most successful works of this period are the altarpieces in San Bernardino and Santo Spirito, which show a new inventiveness, a greater competence in rendering light and shade, and a preference for opulent colours. The compositions of his Bergamo works are more self-assured, and the Susanna and the Elders (1517) exhibits his growing ability as a narrative painter.
In 1526 or 1527 Lotto returned to Venice, where he was briefly influenced by the glowing palette and grand compositional schemes of Titian. This is best seen in his St. Nicholas of Bari in Glory (1529). But Lotto’s main interest was in the forceful depiction of emotions and psychological insights. This is evident in his many portraits and especially in the Annunciation (c. 1527), with its agitated figures, swirling drapery, dramatic lighting, and scant interest in perspective.
In this period his work became even more emotional, and many works, such as the Madonna of the Rosary (1539) and the Crucifixion (1531), exhibit a highly charged mysticism in their nervous, crowded compositions and pale colouring. His numerous portraits of this period are among his most incisively descriptive of the sitter’s character; and the Madonna Enthroned with Four Saints (c. 1540) shows Lotto at the height of his narrative power.
Lotto was back in Venice in 1540, and his St. Antonino Giving Alms (1542) shows a renewed interest in Titian. But in 1549 he returned to the Marche, and his life became increasingly unsettled. He had a nervous, irritable temperament and seemed unable to stay long in one place or to sustain permanent relationships. In his old age he was destitute and was forced to paint numbers on hospital beds to earn a living. In 1554, partially blind, he entered the Santa Casa in Loreto as an oblate member with a permission to reside and work there. There he began one of his most sensitive masterpieces, the Presentation in the Temple, which remained unfinished at his death.
