Neysa McMein, original name Margery Edna McMein,  (born January 24, 1888, Quincy, Illinois, U.S.—died May 12, 1949, New York, New York),  American artist whose commercial style was highly popular in magazines and advertising of the 1920s and ’30s.
McMein attended the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and in 1913 went to New York City. She studied at the Art Students League for a few months and in 1914 sold her first drawing to the Boston Star. The next year she sold a drawing that was used as a cover for the Saturday Evening Post. Her warm pastel drawings of chic, healthy American girls were highly popular and brought her many commissions. During World War I she drew posters for the U.S. and French governments and spent six months in France as a lecturer and entertainer. From 1923 through 1937 McMein provided all of the artwork for McCall’s covers. She also supplied work to McClure’s, Liberty, Woman’s Home Companion, Collier’s, Photoplay, and other magazines, and she created advertising graphics for products such as Palmolive soap and Lucky Strike cigarettes. General Mills’s Marjorie C. Husted commissioned her to create the image of Betty Crocker, a fictional housewife whose brand name was intended to be a seal of solid, middle-class domestic values.
In addition to her highly successful career as an illustrator and designer, McMein also lived a brilliant social life. A lively and unself-consciously beautiful woman, she became a regular member of the Algonquin Round Table set, many of whom frequented her West 57th Street studio. In 1923 she married John C. Baragwanath, a mining engineer and author, with whom she established an unrestrictive relationship.
With the decline in popularity of her particular style of commercial art in the late 1930s, McMein turned increasingly to portraiture, at first in pastel and later in oil. Among her subjects were Presidents Warren Harding and Herbert Hoover, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Dorothy Parker, Helen Hayes, and Charlie Chaplin.
