Niccolò dell’Abate, Abate also spelled Abbate, Niccolò also spelled Nicolò,  (born c. 1509, Modena, Duchy of Modena—died  1571, Fontainebleau, France), painter of the Bolognese school who, along with others, introduced the post-Renaissance Italian style of painting to France and helped to inspire the French classical school of landscape painting.
Abate probably received early training from his father, the stuccoist Giovanni dell’Abate. He began his career in Modena as a student of the sculptor Antonio Begarelli. He was greatly influenced by the Ferrarese school of painting and particularly by Dosso Dossi. Sometime after 1537 he began working in Modena with Alberto Fontana, often painting building facades, including that of the Pratonieri Palace. He also decorated a castle near Modena (c. 1540) with large-scale scenes from Virgil’s Aeneid. In 1546 he worked with Fontana to decorate a building of the Town Hall (Palazzo Pubblico) in Modena. Abate’s Martyrdom of St. Peter and St. Paul in the church of San Pietro, Modena (1547), probably established his reputation. During his stay in Bologna (1548–52), his style, influenced by his contemporaries Correggio and Parmigianino, matured. His stucco-surface landscapes (c. 1550) in the Poggi Palace (now Palazzo dell’Università), which depict scenes from Life of Camilla and again from the Aeneid, survive to show his understanding of nature.
In 1552 Abate was called to the court of the king of France, Henry II, at Fontainebleau, and he remained in France for the rest of his life. With Francesco Primaticcio he composed immense murals, most of them later lost. He decorated both the Galerie d’Ulysse (destroyed 1738) and the Galerie Henri II (1552–56). He also painted portraits of the royal family, including Henry II and Catherine de’ Medici (1553). His easel works, which included an enormous number of lyrical landscapes based upon pagan themes, were burned in 1643 by the Austrian regent, Anna. Among his later paintings executed for Charles IX were a series of landscapes with mythologies that influenced the 17th-century French painters Claude Lorrain and Nicolas Poussin. He also designed a series of tapestries, Les Mois arabesques, and some of his designs were adopted by the painted enamel industry of Limoges. His last works are believed to be 16 murals (1571) in which he was assisted by his son, Giulio Camillo. His work in France is recognized as a principal contribution to the first significant, wholly secular movement in French painting, the Fontainebleau style.
