Paris Bordone, in full Paris Paschalinus Bordone, Bordone also spelled Bordon,  (born c. 1500, Treviso, Republic of Venice [Italy]—died  Jan. 19, 1571, Venice), Renaissance Venetian painter of religious, mythological, and anecdotal subjects. He is perhaps best known for his striking sexualized paintings of women.
After his father’s death, Bordone moved with his mother to Venice. He probably became a pupil of Titian about 1516 but remained in his workshop for under two years. There is evidence of tension between the two because Bordone was able to imitate his master’s style so well. In 1523, when Bordone was offered his first commission to paint an altarpiece for a Venetian church, Titian took the work for himself. Despite this rift, Bordone spent most of his working life in Venice, though he visited France to work temporarily at the court of Francis I in Fontainebleau in 1538. It was at court that he created many of his paintings of women. He is also said to have visited Augsburg and worked for the Fugger family sometime in the 1540s. Many of his pictures cannot be dated with any certainty. It is also difficult to ascertain whether he was influenced by working with other contemporary artists or merely by viewing prints of their work.
Bordone painted many scenes of the Madonna and saints seated in a landscape (a genre known as sacra conversazione), along with other religious subjects such as Christ Among the Doctors. His finest historical painting is Fisherman Consigning a Ring to the Doge (1534–35), and he first gained public attention after he won the competition to create it. The painting is characterized by typically bright colours, heavy Titianesque figures, and complex architectural motifs derived from the work of Sebastiano Serlio. Bordone’s style gradually became more Mannerist, with warmer colours, tightly curled draperies, and figures in oddly tilted poses occupying the extreme foreground against a distant landscape. Though he continued to paint images of the Holy Family in outdoor settings, late in his career he also painted a series of groups of statuesque blonde female figures. Among these erotic paintings are Diana with Two Nymphs and Venus with Flora. Bordone worked from his studio in Venice after 1560, although many of his important commissions came from Treviso. He also painted portraits throughout his career.
