Piero di Cosimo, original name Piero di Lorenzo,  (born 1462, Florence [Italy]—died 1521, Florence), Italian Renaissance painter noted for his eccentric character and his fanciful mythological paintings. Not a member of any specific school of painting, Piero instead borrowed other artists’ techniques to create his own singular style.
Piero’s name derives from that of his master, Cosimo Rosselli, whom he assisted in 1481 on the frescoes Sermon on the Mount and possibly Crossing of the Red Sea in the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican. There he saw the frescoes of Sandro Botticelli and Domenico Ghirlandaio, whose styles dominate his early Jason and Queen Hypsipyle with the Women of Lemnos (1499). In The Visitation with Saint Nicholas and Saint Anthony Abbot (c. 1489/90), the permanent influence of the enamel-like colours of Hugo van der Goes’s Portinari Altarpiece (c. 1473–78) is first visible.
Piero’s mature style is exemplified by his mythological paintings, which exhibit romantic fantasy. Many are based on Vitruvius’s account of human evolution. They are filled with fantastic hybrid forms of people and animals engaged in revels (The Misfortunes of Silenus, c. 1500) or in fighting (The Fight Between the Lapiths and the Centaurs, c. 1500–15). Others show early human use of fire (The Forest Fire, c. 1505) and tools (Vulcan and Aeolus, c. 1490). The multitude of firm glossy-skinned nudes in these paintings show Piero’s interest in Luca Signorelli’s work. But, while The Discovery of Honey by Bacchus (c. 1499) retains Signorelli’s figure types, its forms are more softly modeled and its light is warmer, showing Piero’s mastery of the new technique of oil painting. In the Liberation of Andromeda (c. 1510–13), Piero adopts Leonardo da Vinci’s sfumato (smoky light and shade) to achieve a new lush atmospheric effect.
Piero painted several portraits, of which the best known is the memorial bust of Simonetta Vespucci (c. 1480), mistress of Giuliano de’ Medici. Vespucci is partly nude, and her rhythmic profile is accentuated by the black cloud placed behind it. She wears a gold necklace, around which two snakes coil, possibly an allusion to her death from consumption. The transience of youth and beauty is the theme of the famous A Satyr Mourning over a Nymph (c. 1495). The softly undulating form of a nymph, or possibly the accidentally slain Procris, lies in a meadow bathed in a golden light while a curious satyr kneels beside her and her faithful dog mourns at her feet—considered the first humanized dog in art.
Piero’s art reflects his misanthropic personality. He belonged to no school of painting and operated outside the official artistic milieu. Instead, he borrowed from many artists, incorporating elements of their style into his own idiosyncratic manner. He painted many works to please only himself (an unusual practice for the time) and declared that he often found inspiration for his paintings in the stains on walls.
