Richard Nugent, in full Richard Bruce Nugent, pseudonyms Bruce Nugent and Richard Bruce,  (born July 2, 1906, Washington, D.C., U.S.—died May 27, 1987, Hoboken, N.J.), African American writer, artist, and actor associated with the Harlem Renaissance.
Born into a socially prominent family, Nugent grew up in Washington, D.C. Nugent was 13 when his father died and the family moved to New York City. He was introduced to author Langston Hughes in 1925, and this event signaled the beginning of Nugent’s lifelong fascination with the arts and his contribution to the literary and political movements of the Harlem Renaissance. He explored issues of sexuality and black identity in his poems, short stories, and erotic drawings. His ardent bohemianism was the inspiration for the character of Paul Arbian, an artist and writer, in Wallace Thurman’s 1932 novel Infants of the Spring.
“Shadows,” Nugent’s first published poem, was anthologized in Countee Cullen’s 1927 work Caroling Dusk: An Anthology of Verse by Negro Poets. A one-act musical, “Sadhji: An African Ballet” (based on his earlier short story of the same name), was published in Plays of Negro Life: A Source-book of Native American Drama (1927) and produced in 1932. This African morality tale tells of the beautiful Sadhji, a chieftain’s wife, beloved by Mrabo, her stepson, who, in turn, is loved by his male friend Numbo. In 1926 Nugent contributed two brush-and-ink drawings and the short story “Smoke, Lilies, and Jade” (published under the name Richard Bruce) to the only issue of Fire!! The story, which depicts a 19-year-old artist’s sexual encounter with another man, was a deliberate attempt to shake up the conventional attitudes of middle-class African Americans. Although he continued to write the occasional article, Nugent supported himself first by acting, then by his involvement, during the 1930s, in the federal arts programs.
From the 1960s he concentrated chiefly on painting and drawing. Together with artist Romare Bearden and others, he founded the Harlem Cultural Council.
