Romaine Goddard Brooks, original name Beatrice Romaine Goddard,  (born May 1, 1874, Rome, Italy—died December 7, 1970, Nice, France), American painter who, in her gray-shaded portraits, penetrated and distilled her subjects’ personalities to an often disturbing degree.
Born to wealthy American parents, Beatrice Romaine Goddard had a very unhappy childhood. Her mother doted on a paranoid and mentally unstable son and treated Romaine viciously, with behaviour ranging from neglect to accusations of demonic possession. She finally gained independence at age 21. From 1896 to 1899 she studied painting in Italy and then set up a studio on the island of Capri. With the death of her brother and, soon after, her mother, Goddard became independently wealthy. In 1902 she entered into a short-lived marriage of convenience with John Ellingham Brooks.
In 1905 Romaine Brooks moved to Paris, where she established herself in literary, artistic, and homosexual circles. In 1915 she met Natalie Clifford Barney, who was to be her lover for a great many years. Brooks’s portrait of Barney, The Amazon (c. 1920), is among her finest works and, like most of her portraits, is characterized by dark, muted colours and an image or symbol strongly associated with the particular subject: in this case, Barney, who was an expert horsewoman, is accompanied by a miniature horse. Brooks’s other paintings, most of which are also portraits, are predominantly studies in gray with the occasional addition of a stroke of bright colour, reflecting the influence of the palette of James McNeill Whistler. Her portraits were often so painfully honest that her sitters preferred not to have them exhibited.
Brooks’s career reached its height in 1925 with exhibitions in London, Paris, and New York City. From the 1930s onward, her work was largely forgotten. However, in 1971, a year after her death, the National Collection of Fine Arts (now the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of American Art) staged an exhibition of her work. The exhibition rekindled interest in Brooks and led to several other exhibitions during the 1980s.
