Sofonisba Anguissola,  (born c. 1532, Cremona [Italy]—died November 1625, Palermo), late Renaissance painter best known for her portraiture. She was one of the first known female artists and one of the first women artists to establish an international reputation. Among female painters, she was unusual in that her father was a nobleman rather than a painter.
The oldest of seven—six girls and one boy—Anguissola was born into a wealthy family. Like a true Renaissance man, her father, Amilcare Anguissola, was guided by the words of Baldassare Castiglione in Il cortegiano (The Courtier), not least in his consideration regarding the proper education of a young woman. In 1546 both Sofonisba and Elena, his second daughter, were sent to board in the household of Bernardino Campi, a prominent local painter. They remained under instruction with Campi for three years until he moved from Cremona to Milan. Sofonisba continued her training with Bernardino Gatti, through whom she gained an appreciation of the work of Correggio. During this period of her life, through the influence of her father, she also received encouragement from Michelangelo, copying a drawing he sent her and sending it to him for his appraisal. While beginning to earn a living, Sofonisba also taught her sisters Lucia, Europa, and Anna Maria to paint. About 30 of her paintings from this period, including many self-portraits and the well-known Lucia, Minerva, and Europa Anguissola Playing Chess (1555), survived into the 21st century.
Anguissola’s reputation spread, and in 1559 she was invited to Madrid, to the court of Philip II, where, in addition to painting portraits, she was an attendant to the infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia (later the archduchess of Austria) and a lady-in-waiting to Philip’s third wife, Elizabeth of Valois. Most of Anguissola’s paintings of this period are no longer extant, having burned in a fire at court during the 17th century. About 1571, while still in Madrid and with a dowry provided by the king, she married a Sicilian, Fabrizio de Moncada. Although she was once thought to have settled with him in Sicily, recent scholarship suggests that she may have remained in Spain after her marriage. She was widowed about 1579.
Aboard a ship bound for Cremona late in 1579, Anguissola met the captain, a Genoese nobleman by the name of Orazio Lomellino, and in January 1580 she married him. From 1584 until about 1616–20 the couple is known to have lived in Genoa. During this later period, she was influenced by the work of the Genoese painter Luca Cambiaso. Her work, like that of many early female painters, was often attributed to male painters of the period—in Anguissola’s case, painters as various as Titian, Leonardo da Vinci, Giovanni Battista Moroni, Alonso Sánchez Coello, and Francisco de Zurbarán. Near the end of her life, on July 12, 1624, she was visited by the young Flemish painter Anthony van Dyck, who recorded her advice to him and sketched the elderly painter in his notebook.
Doubtless, Anguissola was among the most-accomplished painters of the late Renaissance. No less a commentator than Giorgio Vasari, who saw her work in her father’s house in 1566, noted in his Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects that she had “worked with deeper study and greater grace than any woman of our times at problems of design, for not only has she learned to draw, paint, and copy from nature, and reproduce most skillfully works by other artists, but she has on her own painted some most rare and beautiful paintings.”
