Thomas Kinkade,  (born January 19, 1958, Sacramento, California, U.S.—died April 6, 2012, Monte Sereno, California), American artist who built a successful industry on his light-infused paintings of tranquil idyllic scenes.
Kinkade studied art history and took studio classes for two years at the University of California, Berkeley, before transferring to the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, California. It was there that he began experimenting with techniques to create the effects of light and atmosphere in his paintings. After graduation he and a friend rode boxcars from California to New York, and Kinkade sketched the American towns and landscapes that they encountered along their journey; these works were published in the book The Artist’s Guide to Sketching (1982). Kinkade was hired shortly thereafter to help paint some 700 backgrounds for the animated film Fire and Ice (1983), for which he created his trademark luminous scenes.
In his own oil paintings, which he began selling in local galleries in the 1980s, Kinkade incorporated radiant effects that he considered expressive of spiritual values. (About that time he had become a born-again Christian.) Accordingly, he promoted himself as the “Painter of Light,” a moniker historically associated with English painter J.M.W. Turner but that he registered as a trademark in 1996. Typical subjects of Kinkade’s paintings included cottages, bridges, gardens, and Americana scenes infused with the warm glow of sunlight. He also produced Impressionist-style paintings under the brush name Robert Girrard from 1984 to 1990.
In 1984 Kinkade began to distribute his artwork with the help of investors, and in 1989 he and Ken Raasch launched Lightpost Publishing, which was dedicated exclusively to Kinkade’s work. Lightpost eventually developed into the holding company Media Arts Group, Inc. (later the Thomas Kinkade Company), which, among other endeavours, opened Thomas Kinkade Gallery retail stores, mostly in the United States. The nostalgic quality of Kinkade’s paintings, which were reproduced in the thousands, made him wildly popular with the general public, and he became one of the most highly collected living artists. Despite his commercial success, Kinkade was often derided by critics who considered his work to be kitschy. They also denounced the mass marketing of his work, which appeared on a wide variety of products, including calendars, notecards, and coffee mugs.
As his profile expanded, Kinkade occasionally partnered with other corporate entities. With the Disney Company, Kinkade created the Disney Dreams Collection, a series of paintings—including Beauty and the Beast Falling in Love (2010) and Sleeping Beauty (2011)—that encapsulate an entire Disney animated film in one image. Additionally, Kinkade was named the featured artist for the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Centennial Era, a commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the first Indianapolis 500 race. In that capacity, he created the paintings Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 100th Anniversary (2009) and A Century of Racing! The 100th Anniversary Indianapolis 500 Mile Race (2011), each of which was depicted on the official Indianapolis 500 program.
Kinkade also published numerous books, including Lightposts for Living: The Art of Choosing a Joyful Life (1999), that featured images of his work. With Katherine Spencer, he wrote the Cape Light and Angel Island series of inspirational novels, begun in 2002 and 2010, respectively. Thomas Kinkade’s Christmas Cottage, a film inspired by his life and art, was released in 2008. In April 2012 Kinkade died from an accidental overdose of alcohol and Valium.
