Vladimir Lukich Borovikovsky, original surname Borovik,  (born July 24 [Aug. 4, New Style], 1757, Mirgorod, Russia (now Myrhorod, Ukraine)—died April 6 [April 18, New Style], 1825, St. Petersburg), Russian artist of Ukrainian background who was the foremost portraitist of the sentimentalist era and a master of ecclesiastic painting.
Borovikovsky lived in Ukraine until he was 31 years old, having learned the trade of painting from his father, a Cossack and a minor member of the nobility who worked as an icon painter. Only a few of his father’s icons and portraits are extant. Though deeply sincere, they are slightly rough in execution. Vladimir Borovikovsky became a prominent master in St. Petersburg under the positive influence of the international art scene in the capital and the group of St. Petersburg literary figures who were his patrons. The representatives of this group were responsible for drawing the attention of the imperial court to his work, thus securing his future career. In 1787 Borovikovsky was commissioned to decorate a temporary palace for Catherine II (the Great) on the Dnieper River at Kremenchug (now Kremenchuk, Ukraine). She was so pleased with his work that she sent him to St. Petersburg. His literary friends assisted him with his move in late 1788. Borovikovsky’s concept of portrait painting matured under their influence, assuming moral feeling as a basis of the image (in accordance with the principles of the literary movement of sentimentalism). In an attempt to supplement his education, Borovikovsky studied with Johann Baptist Lampi the Elder, a professor of the Vienna Academy of the Arts who lived in St. Petersburg from 1792 to 1797.
Borovikovsky’s portrait of Catherine, painted in 1794 in accordance with the principles of his literary friends and presented to the empress, was the first emergence of sentimentalism in painting. The painting shows the empress walking alone in the imperial park with her dog, pointing quite casually at a monument honouring the success of her reign. For the first time, the empress, who is dressed in everyday clothes, is characterized not by her regalia but by a peaceful and moving landscape that is in harmony with her figure. The monument of imperial glory, modestly placed in the farthest depths of the perspective, comes across as a symbol of the greatness of her soul and not as an attribute of her high position. On the basis of this portrait, Lampi requested that the academy accord Borovikovsky the title of academic, a request that was granted in 1795. The empress turned down the petition but a year later granted Borovikovsky the title after he completed a portrait of one of the empress’s grandchildren—also a commission that he owed to Lampi.
The following decade was Borovikovsky’s most creative period, with sentimentalism coming fully to the fore. His images gained in depth and became ambiguous and psychologically more complex. One of his best works of this period was Portrait of Maria Ivanovna Lopukhina (1797). In this work the calm, reposing position of her body stands in contrast to her delicately raised head, enchanting the viewer with the tenderness of her countenance and the profound seriousness, almost sadness, of her glance. The blossoming roses to the right of her elbow are drooping, their colour fading. The lighting in the painting ranges from full light to darkness, and yet there is not a single bright hue or sharp contour in the work. Everything works together to convey a sense of melancholy, subdued emotion, and transience. The portrait was painted a few years before Lopukhina’s early death from consumption.
It is likely that rather than sensing her tragic fate, Borovikovsky had imbued the painting with his own preoccupation: the question of Christian moral duty, which was of particular importance to him from the late 1790s. Seeking further moral enlightenment, Borovikovsky in 1802 became a member of a Masonic lodge and in 1819 of a mystic sect, both of which, however, ultimately disappointed him. According to Borovikovsky’s pupils, he was a man of great generosity of spirit.
