Accretion disk,  a disklike flow of gas, plasma, dust, or particles around any astronomical object in which the material orbiting in the gravitational field of the object loses energy and angular momentum as it slowly spirals inward. In astrophysics, the term accretion refers to the growth in mass of any celestial object due to its gravitational attraction. The formation of stars and planets and the powerful emissions from quasars, radio galaxies, X-ray binaries (see X-ray astronomy), and probably also Type Ia supernovas all involve accretion disks. The astronomical object whose mass is growing is known as the accretor.
An accretion disk forms whenever the matter being accreted possesses enough rotational or angular momentum that it cannot simply fall inward toward the accretor along a straight line. In directions perpendicular to the accretor’s rotation axis, the flow tends to flatten onto a disk because the rotation resists the inflow of the material. In directions parallel to the rotation axis, the matter contracts toward a plane until the thermal pressure inside the disk roughly equals the gravitational force.
If the thermal pressure, which resists compression, is small compared with gravity and rotation, which cause the disk to contract vertically, the disk will be geometrically thin, and its thickness will be much smaller than its radial extent. If pressure forces are comparable to rotation and gravity, the accretion disk will be geometrically thick, resembling more a torus than a disk.
Matter within the disk spirals inward because it loses energy and angular momentum due to turbulence and viscosity. In the absence of any viscosity, turbulence, or other forms of friction, the material orbiting the central object would rapidly fall toward the equatorial plane of the disk and then continue to move along circular orbits. Therefore, some form of friction that dissipates angular momentum is necessary for the matter to move inward and accretion to take place.
The accretor can be a forming star or planet, a normal star, or a compact object such as a white dwarf, a neutron star, or a black hole (in approximate order of increasing compactness). Accretion disks emit copious amounts of energy from the conversion of gravitational potential energy into radiation as the accreted material falls or spirals inward. If the accretor is a neutron star or a black hole, accretion can release energy more efficiently than thermonuclear reactions and thus is thought to power the most energetic objects in the universe, including quasars, radio galaxies, and X-ray binaries.
The mass supply for the accretion disk may be material from a companion star (in the case of X-ray binaries and cataclysmic variables), the interstellar medium (in the case of active galactic nuclei), or dust and gas in a protoplanetary disk (in the case of planet formation). The physical conditions inside the disk and the source of the disk material determine the disk’s physical state and chemical composition.
Given the typical densities and temperatures in accretion disks, viscosity is too low to drive the inward drift. It is thought that the friction comes from turbulence due to the rotation of the disk amplifying any magnetic fields that are already there. This turbulence provides the effective viscosity that drives the drift of matter inward while transporting the excess angular momentum outward.
As the material in the disk comes closer to the accretor, it speeds up in response to the stronger gravitational pull and moves along a spiral path at supersonic orbital speeds while still drifting gradually inward at subsonic speeds. If the accretor is a normal main-sequence star, the orbital speed is hundreds of kilometres per second. In the most extreme cases of neutron stars or black holes, the orbital motion approaches the speed of light and therefore needs to be described by the theory of relativity. The emission from the disk displays such relativistic effects as gravitational redshift, in which the wavelength of the emitted light is shifted to longer wavelengths.
Because the disk material needs to lose energy to accrete onto the central object, the material in the disk gets hot, and the heat generated escapes through both sides of the disk. In X-ray binaries, where the accretor is a neutron star or a black hole, the temperatures in the accretion disks range from a few thousand to several million kelvins. Therefore, the disk emits light from infrared to low-energy (soft) X-ray wavelengths. Frequently parts of the disk may evaporate to form an even hotter low-density corona, similar to that of the Sun, emitting radiation in the high-energy (hard) X-ray range.
Much can be learned from detailed spectral studies (see spectroscopy) of the emission from accretion disks. The continuum emission yields clues about the rate at which mass flows through the disk and about the temperature distribution on the surface of the disk. The line emission and its detailed shape allow the measurement of system parameters. In the best cases, the mass and rotation speed of the central compact object can be determined through the detailed analysis of the wavelength and shape of certain spectral lines of iron. These lines provide the best evidence for the existence of black holes.
Many different accreting objects, including quasars, radio galaxies, X-ray binaries, and young stars, eject part of the accreted material from their poles in the form of supersonic jets (see radio jet). It is generally thought that these jets are probably propelled by magnetic forces arising in the magnetic field lines that are helically twisted by the rotation of the disk and that are directed perpendicular to it.
