Aleksandr Volkov, in full Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Volkov,  (born April 27, 1948, Gorlovka, Donetsk oblast, Ukraine, U.S.S.R.), Russian pilot and cosmonaut, the first cosmonaut whose son also went into space.
Volkov graduated from the Chuguyev Higher Air Force School in Kharkov province in Ukraine, U.S.S.R., in 1970. After graduation from the air force school, Volkov served as a test pilot in the Soviet air force and eventually reached the rank of colonel.
Volkov received cosmonaut training from 1976 to 1979. He first flew into space on Sept. 17, 1985, as a research cosmonaut aboard Soyuz T-14 to the Salyut 7 space station. While stationed on Salyut 7, Volkov and two fellow crew members, commander Vladimir Vasyutin and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, conducted scientific and technical experiments with military applications. Unfortunately, the mission was cut short due to the unexpected psychological illness of Vasyutin, and the crew returned to Earth aboard Soyuz T-14 on Nov. 21, 1985.
Volkov flew into space for a second time on Nov. 26, 1988, aboard the Soyuz TM-7 flight to the Mir space station. The crew of Soyuz TM-7 also included flight engineer Sergey Krikalyov of the Soviet Union and research cosmonaut Jean-Loup Chrétien of France. The cosmonauts conducted scientific experiments with the three cosmonauts who were already stationed on Mir, focusing their research efforts mostly on medical and technology experiments in support of the Hermes shuttle project of the European Space Agency. On Dec. 9, 1988, Volkov and Chrétien conducted a space walk to assemble an experimental deployable structure called ERA for French experiments. The mission was shortened due to delays in sending certain modules to Mir, which led to the decision to leave Mir uninhabited until the add-on modules were ready. Volkov returned to Earth aboard Soyuz TM-7 on April 27, 1989.
Volkov traveled into space for a third time on Oct. 2, 1991, as the commander of the Soyuz TM-13 flight to Mir with research cosmonauts Toktar Aubakirov of the Soviet Union and Franz Viehböck of Austria. The cosmonauts performed scientific and technical research, and Volkov conducted a space walk to dismantle equipment and recover experiment materials. He returned to Earth aboard Soyuz TM-13 on March 25, 1992, after nearly six months in space. Volkov’s third space mission attracted considerable public attention due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, while Volkov was in space. He was launched into space as a Soviet citizen and returned to Earth 176 days later, landing in Kazakhstan in a Russian spacecraft.
Volkov was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union and was bestowed with the Order of Lenin. He served as the commander of the cosmonaut detachment at the Yury Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre in Star City, Russia, from 1990 to 1998. He left the space service on Aug. 21, 1998, and retired from active duty in the Russian air force soon after. He is the father of Sergey Volkov, who became the first second-generation cosmonaut in history when he launched into space aboard Soyuz TMA-12 on April 8, 2008.
