Allan Sandage, in full Allan Rex Sandage,  (born June 18, 1926, Iowa City, Iowa, U.S.—died November 13, 2010, San Gabriel, California), American astronomer who led an extensive effort to determine Hubble’s constant, the rate at which the universe is expanding. He also did important early work on quasi-stellar radio sources (quasars), very distant starlike objects that can be strong emitters of radio waves.
Sandage received a bachelor’s degree in physics from the University of Illinois at Urbana in 1948 and a doctorate in astronomy from the California Institute of Technology at Pasadena in 1953. While in graduate school, he was the observing assistant for American astronomer Edwin Hubble from 1950 until Hubble’s death in 1953. He became a member of the staff of the Hale Observatories (now Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories) in California in 1952 and carried out most of his investigations there. Pursuing the theoretical work of several astronomers on the evolution of stars, Sandage, with Harold L. Johnson, demonstrated in the early 1950s that the observed characteristics of the light and colour of the brightest stars in various globular clusters indicate that the clusters can be arranged in order according to their age. This information provided insight into stellar evolution and galactic structure.
Beginning in 1958 and over much of his career, the main focus of Sandage’s research was on the determination of Hubble’s constant, the rate at which the universe is expanding. Sandage and his collaborators—chief among them Swiss astronomer Gustav Tammann—measured the distance to many galaxies using many different methods. The average value of Hubble’s constant derived from these many different measurements was about 50 km per second per megaparsec. (A megaparsec is 3.26 million light-years.) This conflicted with the value of 100 km per second per megaparsec determined by French-born American astronomer Gerard de Vaucouleurs and his collaborators. The debate over which of the two values was correct lasted decades and was not resolved until the late 1990s, when data from the Hubble Space Telescope found a value of 72 km per second per megaparsec.
Sandage also became a leader in the study of quasi-stellar radio sources, comparing accurate positions of radio sources with photographic sky maps and then using a large optical telescope to find a visual starlike source at the point where the strong radio waves are being emitted. Sandage later discovered that some of the remote starlike objects with similar characteristics are not radio sources. He also found that the light from a number of the sources varies rapidly and irregularly in intensity.
Sandage was the recipient of numerous honours, including the Crafoord Prize of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1991).
