Amalthea,  small, potato-shaped moon of the planet Jupiter and the only Jovian satellite other than the four discovered by Galileo in 1610 to have been found by direct visual observation (as opposed to photography or electronic imaging) from Earth. It was discovered in 1892 by the American astronomer Edward Emerson Barnard and named for a figure in Greek mythology associated with the infant Jupiter.
Amalthea circles Jupiter once every 11 hours 57 minutes (0.498 Earth day) at a distance of 181,000 km (112,500 miles) in a nearly circular orbit that lies within half a degree of Jupiter’s equatorial plane. Photographs transmitted by the Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft in 1979 and confirmed by the Galileo orbiter in the late 1990s show that Amalthea is an irregular rocky body measuring 262 × 146 × 134 km (163 × 91 × 83 miles). Like the Moon, which always keeps the same face toward Earth, Amalthea rotates at the same rate that it revolves around Jupiter and thus keeps the same face toward the planet. Amalthea’s long axis always points toward Jupiter.
By measuring the gravitational influence of Amalthea on the Galileo spacecraft, scientists determined that the moon has such a remarkably low density—0.86 gram per cubic cm—that it could float in water. Evidently, Amalthea is highly porous, perhaps as a result of collisions that repeatedly shattered its rocky interior. Low densities ascribed to this same cause also have been observed for some of the inner moons of Saturn.
Amalthea has a dark, reddish surface marked by impact craters. The leading hemisphere (that facing the direction of motion) is some 30 percent brighter than the trailing one, presumably as a result of bombardment by small meteoroids that have entered the Jovian system. The red colour probably results from contamination by particles of sulfur and sulfur compounds that are continually shed by the nearby volcanically active satellite Io. The largest impact crater on Amalthea is Pan, which has a diameter of about 90 km (55 miles).
