Apollo 13,  U.S. spaceflight, launched on April 11, 1970, that suffered an oxygen tank explosion en route to the Moon, threatening the lives of three astronauts—commander Jim Lovell, lunar module pilot Fred Haise, and command module pilot Jack Swigert.
Apollo 13 was launched from Cape Kennedy, Florida, by a giant Saturn V launch vehicle and only minutes later was inserted into orbit around Earth. About 2.5 hours after launch, the still-attached S IVB third stage was reignited to provide the final boost toward the Moon. The transposition maneuver (removing the lunar module, code-named Aquarius, from the S IVB adapter) was carried out efficiently, and soon Apollo 13 was coasting toward the Moon on a path so accurate that the first planned course adjustment was canceled. Later in the mission, the craft underwent a hybrid transfer maneuver to facilitate landing in the difficult Fra Mauro region of the Moon. To do this, the service module’s propulsion system provided a 4.6-metre- (15-foot-) per-second velocity change designed to lower the command module’s closest approach to the Moon from 389 km (242 miles) to 109 km (68 miles) and place the craft on a “non-free-return” trajectory. This meant that should no further propulsive maneuver be made during the flight, the craft would not swing around the Moon and return directly to Earth on a “free-return” trajectory but instead would miss Earth by 4,750 km (2,950 miles). However, a shift back to a free-return trajectory was within the capability of both the service module propulsion system and the lunar module descent stage propulsion system. So accurate was the hybrid transfer that a scheduled course correction was canceled.
April 12, the day after launch, passed without incident. Early on the evening of April 13, the astronauts pressurized the lunar module Aquarius, and Lovell and Haise passed from the command module Odyssey through the connecting tunnel while checking all systems for the forthcoming landing. Suddenly, as Lovell was moving through the tunnel on his way back from Aquarius to Odyssey, a loud explosion was heard. All three astronauts quickly gathered in Odyssey to study the instruments in an effort to determine what had happened. Noting that one of the main electrical systems aboard was degrading, Haise and Lovell radioed the information to mission control in Houston, quickly turning a routine flight into one of the most exciting episodes in space history.
Within eight seconds of the explosion, pressure in one of the service module’s two cryogenic oxygen tanks had dropped to zero. Together with the cryogenic hydrogen tanks, they fed the required supplies to the craft’s three fuel cells, which were needed for the generation of electrical power, oxygen for breathing, and drinking water.
About an hour after the accident, mission control announced that “we are now looking toward an alternate mission, swinging around the Moon and using the lunar module power systems because of the situation that has developed here this evening.” The astronauts were to move into Aquarius, which would serve as a lifeboat, while the disabled Apollo 13 swung around the Moon and headed homeward. All thoughts of a lunar landing had long since been abandoned.
The anxiety for the safety of the astronauts was felt in every corner of the globe, and millions of persons remained glued to television and radio sets as the perilous journey unfolded. Still three days away from Earth, the astronauts moved into the lunar module Aquarius, which they powered up before shutting down the command module Odyssey to conserve the latter’s emergency battery power for the atmospheric reentry maneuver at the end of the mission. Only the command module could pass through Earth’s atmosphere; the lunar module would have to be discarded, along with the service module, before the outer atmosphere was reached. In the meantime, however, the lunar module would be their home.
When the astronauts first transferred into and activated Aquarius, Apollo 13 was about 20 hours from the Moon. Plans were made for transferring out of the hybrid trajectory and onto the free-return trajectory, a maneuver that was executed in the early morning hours of April 14. At mission control, teams of experts worked to check out all feasible maneuvers and situations in flight simulators, feeding every plan and contingency through computers. Leaders from all parts of the world voiced concern, and from Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin came the message that “the Soviet Government has given orders to all citizens and members of the armed forces to use all necessary means to render assistance in the rescue of the American astronauts.” Four Soviet ships began moving toward the planned recovery area, while French and British warships also moved to the rescue. Radio contact with Apollo 13 was lost during the evening of April 14 as the craft swung behind the Moon, passing at an altitude of 264 km (164 miles) at the closest approach. (Since their trajectory had a higher lunar altitude than other Apollo missions, Apollo 13 set the record for farthest flight from Earth of 401,056 km [249,205 miles].) Soon afterward the spacecraft started along its return path home. Meanwhile, the long-since-discarded S IVB third stage crashed onto the Moon—it had followed an independent trajectory—as part of a planned experiment to cause an artificial moonquake to aid scientists in understanding the nature of the lunar interior. When the astronauts learned from Houston of the stage’s impact, Swigert radioed back, “Well, at least something worked on this flight.…I’m sure glad we didn’t have an LM [Lunar Module] impact too!”
About two hours later the descent stage propulsion system of the lunar module was ignited for 5 seconds at 10 percent throttle, 21 seconds at 40 percent throttle, and almost 4 minutes at full throttle. This added 941 km (585 miles) per hour to Apollo 13’s velocity, thereby cutting by 10 hours the length of the homeward journey and ensuring a splashdown in the Pacific Ocean south of Samoa. On board the spacecraft, oxygen stores remained sufficient, as did cooling water. The astronauts reduced their consumption of drinking water to six ounces per day and their consumption of electricity by 80 percent. However, the lunar module’s lithium hydroxide cartridges that removed carbon dioxide from the air would last only about 50 hours, and those from the command module were not designed to fit Aquarius. Therefore, engineers on the ground devised a makeshift adapter scheme, radioing to Apollo 13 instructions on how to attach the cartridges from the command module to the lunar module hoses. The job was done, and Haise reported, “Our do-it-yourself lithium hydroxide canister change is complete.”
