astronomical observatory,  any structure containing telescopes and auxiliary instruments with which to observe celestial objects. Observatories can be classified on the basis of the part of the electromagnetic spectrum in which they are designed to observe. The largest number of observatories are optical; i.e., they are equipped to observe in and near the region of the spectrum visible to the human eye. Some other observatories are instrumented to detect cosmic emitters of radio waves, while still others called satellite observatories are Earth satellites that carry special telescopes and detectors to study celestial sources of such forms of high-energy radiation as gamma rays and X-rays from high above the atmosphere.
Optical observatories have a long history. The predecessors of astronomical observatories were monolithic structures that tracked the positions of the Sun, Moon, and other celestial bodies for timekeeping or calendrical purposes. The most famous of these ancient structures is Stonehenge, constructed in England over the period from 3000 to 1520 bce. At about the same time, astrologer-priests in Babylonia observed the motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets from atop their terraced towers known as ziggurats. No astronomical instruments appear to have been used. The Maya people of the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico carried out the same practice at El Caracol, a dome-shaped structure somewhat resembling a modern optical observatory. There is again no evidence of any scientific instrumentation, even of a rudimentary nature.
Perhaps the first observatory that used instruments for accurately measuring the positions of celestial objects was built about 150 bce on the island of Rhodes by the greatest of the pre-Christian astronomers, Hipparchus. There he discovered precession and developed the magnitude system used to indicate the brightness of celestial objects. The true predecessors of the modern observatory were those established in the Islamic world. Observatories were built at Damascus and Baghdad as early as the 9th–10th century ce. A splendid one was built at Marāgheh (now in Iran) about 1260 ce, and substantial modifications in Ptolemaic astronomy were introduced there. The most productive Islamic observatory was that erected by the Timurid prince Ulūgh Beg at Samarkand about 1420; he and his assistants made a catalog of stars from observations with a large quadrant. The first notable premodern European observatory was that at Uraniborg on the island of Hven, built by King Frederick II of Denmark for Tycho Brahe in 1576 ce.
The first optical telescope used to study the heavens was constructed in 1609 by Galileo Galilei, using information from Flemish pioneers in lens-making. The first major centres for astronomical study used a telescope movable only in one plane, with motion solely along the local meridian (the “transit,” or “meridian circle”). Such centres were founded in the 18th and 19th centuries at Greenwich (London), Paris, Cape Town, and Washington, D.C. By timing the passage of stars as the local meridian was swept past them by Earth’s rotation, astronomers were able to improve the accuracy of position measurements of celestial objects from a few minutes of arc (before the advent of the telescope) to less than a tenth of a second of arc.
One notable observatory built and operated by an individual was that of Sir William Herschel, assisted by his sister, Caroline Herschel, in Slough, England. Known as Observatory House, its largest instrument had a mirror made of speculum metal, with a diameter of 122 cm (48 inches) and a focal length of 17 metres (40 feet). Completed in 1789, it became one of the technical wonders of the 18th century.
Today the site of the world’s largest grouping of large optical telescopes is atop Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii. Most notable in this array of instruments are the two 10-metre (394-inch) Keck telescopes, the 8.2-metre (320-inch) Subaru Telescope, and the two 8.1-metre (319-inch) Gemini telescopes. The largest modern-day optical telescope is the 10.4-metre (409-inch) Gran Telescopio Canarias reflector on La Palma, in the Canary Islands, Spain.
The ability to observe the universe in the radio region of the spectrum was developed during the 1930s. The American engineer Karl Jansky detected radio signals from the centre of the Milky Way Galaxy in 1931 by means of a linear directional antenna. Soon thereafter the American engineer and astronomer Grote Reber constructed a prototype of the radio telescope, a bowl-shaped antenna 9.4 metres (31 feet) in diameter.
Today’s radio telescopes are capable of observing at most wavelength regions, from a few millimetres to about 20 metres. They vary in construction, though they are typically huge movable dishes. The world’s largest steerable dish is the 100-metre (328-foot) telescope at Green Bank, West Virginia. The largest single-unit radio telescope is the Five-hundred-metre Aperture Spherical radio Telescope (FAST) located in Guizhou province, China. Lying level in a natural depression, the main antenna of this instrument has a diameter of 500 metres (about 1,600 feet). Limited aiming capability is allowed by Earth’s motion and by some movement of the panels of the dish and of the overhanging antenna.
One other significant radio telescope is the Very Large Array (VLA), operated by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Located near Socorro, New Mexico, the VLA is composed of 27 individual radio telescopes, each of which is 25 metres (81 feet) in diameter. These instruments are not only steerable but also movable over railroad tracks in the shape of a large Y. Each arm of the Y is 21 km (13 miles) long. The purpose of the VLA is to obtain extremely high-resolution imaging of cosmic radio sources. The resolving ability of a telescope, whether radio or optical, improves with increasing diameter. The individual dishes of the VLA work in precise unison to fabricate a large radio telescope having an effective diameter of 27 km (16.7 miles).
With the advent of the space age, the capability of astronomical instruments to orbit above Earth’s absorbing and distorting atmosphere enabled astronomers to build telescopes sensitive to regions of the electromagnetic spectrum besides those of visible light and radio waves. Since the 1960s, orbiting observatories have been launched to observe gamma rays (Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope), X-rays (Chandra X-ray Observatory and XMM-Newton), ultraviolet radiation (International Ultraviolet Explorer and Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer), and infrared radiation (Infrared Astronomical Satellite and Spitzer Space Telescope). The Hubble Space Telescope, which launched in 1990, observed mainly in visible light. Several satellite observatories such as Herschel, Planck, and the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe have even been placed at the second Lagrangian point (L2) of the Earth-Moon system, a gravitational balance point between Earth and the Sun and 1.5 million km (0.9 million miles) opposite the Sun from Earth. Satellites at L2 are isolated from Earth’s infrared and radio emissions and are also more thermally stable than Earth-orbiting satellites that are alternately cooled and heated as they pass in and out of Earth’s shadow.
