Brahmagupta,  (born 598—died c. 665, possibly Bhillamala [modern Bhinmal], Rajasthan, India), one of the most accomplished of the ancient Indian astronomers. He also had a profound and direct influence on Islamic and Byzantine astronomy.
Brahmagupta was an orthodox Hindu, and his religious views, particularly the Hindu yuga system of measuring the ages of mankind, influenced his work. He severely criticized Jain cosmological views and other heterodox ideas, such as the view of Aryabhata (born 476) that the Earth is a spinning sphere, a view that was widely disseminated by Brahmagupta’s contemporary and rival Bhaskara I.
Brahmagupta’s fame rests mostly on his Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (628; “Correctly Established Doctrine of Brahma”), an astronomical work that he probably wrote while living in Bhillamala, then the capital of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty. It was translated into Arabic in Baghdad about 771 and had a major impact on Islamic mathematics and astronomy. Late in his life, Brahmagupta wrote Khandakhadyaka (665; “A Piece Eatable”), an astronomical handbook that employed Aryabhata’s system of starting each day at midnight.
In addition to expounding on traditional Indian astronomy in his books, Brahmagupta devoted several chapters of Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta to mathematics. In chapters 12 and 18 in particular, he laid the foundations of the two major fields of Indian mathematics, pati-ganita (“mathematics of procedures,” or algorithms) and bija-ganita (“mathematics of seeds,” or equations), which roughly correspond to arithmetic (including mensuration) and algebra, respectively. Chapter 12 is simply named “Mathematics,” probably because the “basic operations,” such as arithmetic operations and proportions, and the “practical mathematics,” such as mixture and series, treated there occupied the major part of the mathematics of Brahmagupta’s milieu. He stressed the importance of these topics as a qualification for a mathematician, or calculator (ganaka). Chapter 18, “Pulverizer,” is named after the first topic of the chapter, probably because no particular name for this area (algebra) existed yet.
Among his major accomplishments, Brahmagupta defined zero as the result of subtracting a number from itself and gave rules for arithmetical operations among negative numbers (“debts”) and positive numbers (“property”), as well as surds. He also gave partial solutions to certain types of indeterminate equations of the second degree with two unknown variables. Perhaps his most famous result was a formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral (a four-sided polygon whose vertices all reside on some circle) and the length of its diagonals in terms of the length of its sides. He also gave a valuable interpolation formula for computing sines.
