Carolyn Shoemaker, née Carolyn Spellman,  (born June 24, 1929, Gallup, New Mexico, U.S.—died August 13, 2021, Flagstaff, Arizona), American astronomer who became an expert at identifying comets. With her husband, Gene Shoemaker, and David H. Levy, she discovered the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet in 1993.
Spellman received bachelor’s and master’s degrees from Chico (California) State College, having studied history, political science, and English literature. She married Gene Shoemaker, a geologist who was also interested in astronomy, on August 18, 1951. After teaching high school for a year, Carolyn remained at home to raise their three children. When their children left home years later, she began helping her husband search for asteroids and comets, a task at which she became an expert. In 1980 Carolyn accepted a position as a visiting scientist with the astrogeology branch of the United States Geological Survey and in 1989 also began serving as research professor of astronomy at Northern Arizona University. Both Carolyn and Gene were on the staff of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona. By 1994 Carolyn had 32 comet discoveries to her credit, which was more than anyone alive at that time.
Teaming with fellow comet hunter Levy at the Palomar Observatory in southern California in March 1993, the Shoemakers discovered a fragmented comet (later named Shoemaker-Levy 9) in orbit around the planet Jupiter. For six days between July 16 and 22, 1994, the three watched anxiously through telescopes as the major fragments of the comet collided with Jupiter. Following months of speculation as to what the impacts would entail, the event itself proved equal to the most optimistic predictions. From the atmosphere of a bruised and battered Jupiter arose tall, bright plumes that left broad, dark stains beneath them, providing a spectacular show for sky watchers around the world.
In 1997, while studying impact craters in Australia, the Shoemakers were involved in a car accident that resulted in Gene’s death. Carolyn suffered serious injuries but recovered.
