Cassini-Huygens,  U.S.-European space mission to Saturn, launched on October 15, 1997. The mission consisted of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s (NASA’s) Cassini orbiter, which was the first space probe to orbit Saturn, and the European Space Agency’s Huygens probe, which landed on Titan, Saturn’s largest moon. Cassini was named for the French astronomer Gian Domenico Cassini, who discovered four of Saturn’s moons and the Cassini division, a large gap in Saturn’s rings. Huygens was named for the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens, who discovered Saturn’s rings and Titan.
Cassini-Huygens was one of the largest interplanetary spacecraft. The Cassini orbiter weighed 2,125 kg (4,685 pounds) and was 6.7 metres (22 feet) long and 4 metres (13 feet) wide. The instruments on board Cassini included radar to map the cloud-covered surface of Titan and a magnetometer to study Saturn’s magnetic field. The disk-shaped Huygens probe was mounted on the side of Cassini. It weighed 349 kg (769 pounds), was 2.7 metres (8.9 feet) across, and carried six instruments designed to study the atmosphere and surface of Titan.
Cassini drew its electric power from the heat generated by the decay of 33 kg (73 pounds) of plutonium, the largest amount of a radioactive element ever launched into space. Protesters had claimed that an accident during launch or Cassini’s flyby of Earth could expose Earth’s population to harmful plutonium dust and tried to block the launch with a flurry of demonstrations and lawsuits, but NASA countered that the casks encasing the plutonium were robust enough to survive any mishap. Cassini-Huygens flew past Venus for a gravity assist in April 1998 and did the same with Earth and Jupiter in August 1999 and December 2000, respectively. During its flyby of Earth, Cassini’s spectrometer observed water on the surface of the Moon; this data was later used in 2009 to confirm the Indian probe Chandrayaan-1’s finding of small amounts of water on the lunar surface.
Cassini-Huygens entered Saturn orbit on July 1, 2004. Huygens was released on December 25, 2004, and landed on Titan on January 14, 2005—the first landing on any celestial body beyond Mars. Data that Huygens transmitted during its final descent and for 72 minutes from the surface included 350 pictures that showed a shoreline with erosion features and a river delta. In error, one radio channel on the satellite was not turned on, and data were lost concerning the winds Huygens encountered during its descent.
Cassini continued to orbit Saturn and complete many flybys of Saturn’s moons. A particularly exciting discovery during its mission was that of geysers of water ice and organic molecules at the south pole of Enceladus, which erupt from an underground global ocean that could be a possible environment for life. Cassini’s radar mapped much of Titan’s surface and found large lakes of liquid methane. Cassini also discovered six new moons and two new rings of Saturn. In July 2008 Cassini’s mission was extended to 2010, and in February 2010 it was extended for another seven years.
Beginning in April 2017, Cassini’s orbit was altered by a close encounter with Titan so that it passed inside Saturn’s innermost ring at a distance of 3,800 km (2,400 miles) from the planet. After 23 such “proximal” orbits, a final encounter with Titan changed Cassini’s orbit so that on September 15, 2017, it ended its mission by plunging into Saturn, which allowed Cassini to sample Saturn’s atmosphere directly and avoid any possible future contamination of Enceladus and Titan.
