Ceres,  dwarf planet, the largest asteroid in the main asteroid belt, and the first asteroid to be discovered. Ceres was found, serendipitously, by the Italian astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi of the Palermo Observatory on January 1, 1801. Additional observations of the object by Piazzi were cut short by illness, but Ceres was recovered on January 1, 1802, by the German Hungarian astronomer Franz von Zach, using an orbit calculated by the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss. Ceres was named after the ancient Roman grain goddess and the patron goddess of Sicily.
Ceres revolves around the Sun once in 4.61 Earth years in a nearly circular, moderately inclined (10.6°) orbit at a mean distance of 2.77 astronomical units (AU; about 414 million km [257 million miles]). Although it—and the next two asteroids discovered, Pallas and Juno—is located near the distance predicted by Bode’s law for the “missing” planet between Mars and Jupiter, most asteroids found subsequently are not so located, and so the agreement with that “law” appears to be coincidental.
Ceres has the shape of a flattened sphere with an equatorial radius of 490 km and a polar radius of 455 km, equivalent in volume to a sphere with a diameter of 940 km—i.e., about 27 percent that of Earth’s Moon. Although Ceres is the largest asteroid, it is not the brightest. That honour belongs to the second largest asteroid, Vesta, which orbits closer to the Sun than Ceres (Vesta’s mean distance is 2.36 AU) and has a surface reflectivity more than three times as high (its albedo is 0.37, compared with 0.09 for Ceres). The mass of Ceres, which accounts for more than one-third the total mass of the main asteroid belt, is about 9.1 × 1020 kg, and its density is 2.2 grams per cubic cm (about two-thirds that of the Moon). Ceres’ shape and density are consistent with a two-layer model of a rocky core surrounded by a thick ice mantle. Ceres rotates once in 9.1 hours. Compositionally, the asteroid’s surface resembles the carbonaceous chondrite meteorites. Water vapour, the first detected in the asteroid belt, escapes into space when Ceres is closest to the Sun.
Ceres was designated a dwarf planet, a new category of solar system objects defined in August 2006 by the International Astronomical Union. (For a discussion of that decision, see planet.) The U.S. space probe Dawn studied the dwarf planet from March 2015 to November 2018. Dawn observed two very bright spots, Cerealia Facula and Vinalia Faculae, in Occator crater on Ceres. The bright spots are highly reflective salts left behind when briny water from an underground reservoir percolated upward and evaporated. The water percolated through fractures left behind when the crater formed 20 million years ago. The salty regions have not been darkened by micrometeorite impacts, indicating that the bright spots formed in the last 2 million years. Because the bright spots contain salt compounds with water that has not dehydrated, the briny water must have percolated upward in the last few hundred years, suggesting that the salty liquid water underneath the crater has not frozen and is perhaps currently percolating from underground.
