Clyde Tombaugh, in full Clyde William Tombaugh, also called Clyde W. Tombaugh,  (born February 4, 1906, Streator, Illinois, U.S.—died January 17, 1997, Las Cruces, New Mexico), American astronomer who discovered Pluto in 1930 after a systematic search for a ninth planet instigated by the predictions of other astronomers. He also discovered several clusters of stars and galaxies, studied the apparent distribution of extragalactic nebulae, and made observations of the surfaces of Mars, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Moon.
Tombaugh initially had no formal training in astronomy, only a keen interest that had been sharpened by his first glimpse of the heavens through his uncle’s telescope. After finishing high school, Tombaugh built his own telescope according to specifications published in a 1925 issue of Popular Astronomy. Using this instrument, he made observations of Jupiter and Mars and sent sketches of these planets to Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, hoping to receive advice about his work. Instead, he received a job offer. Tombaugh’s assignment was to locate the ninth planet, a search instigated in 1905 by astronomer Percival Lowell. To carry out this task, Tombaugh used a 33-cm (13-inch) telescope to photograph the sky and an instrument called a blink comparator to examine the photographic plates for signs of moving celestial bodies. On February 18, 1930, Tombaugh pinpointed Pluto, and on March 13 Lowell Observatory announced the discovery of the new planet. (In 2006 Pluto was reclassified as a dwarf planet.)
After his discovery, Tombaugh attended the University of Kansas on a scholarship, returning each summer to the observatory until completing (1939) his M.A. in astronomy. Upon graduating, he returned to the observatory and continued his patrol of the skies, cataloging more than 30,000 celestial objects before he left in 1946. His observations of Mars led him to conclude in 1950 that the surface of the planet was pitted with craters as a result of its proximity to the asteroid belt, a prediction borne out by images taken by the Mariner 4 space probe in the 1960s. Tombaugh also taught at Arizona State College and at the University of California, Los Angeles, and he worked as an astronomer and optical physicist at the White Sands Missile Range near Las Cruces, New Mexico, where he helped set up an optical tracking system to follow ballistic missiles. He joined the faculty of New Mexico State University in 1955 and there instituted a major program of planetary research. He retired in 1973 but remained involved as an observer and adviser at the university. Among his publications were The Search for Small Natural Earth Satellites (1959) and Out of Darkness: The Planet Pluto (1980), with Patrick Moore.
