Eros,  first asteroid found to travel mainly inside the orbit of Mars and the first to be orbited and landed on by a spacecraft. Eros was discovered on August 13, 1898, by German astronomer Gustav Witt at the Urania Observatory in Berlin. It is named for the god of love in Greek mythology.
A member of a group called near-Earth, or Earth-approaching, asteroids, Eros can pass within 22 million km (14 million miles) of Earth. During a close approach in the 1930s (before the development of direct radar ranging), astronomers were able to observe the asteroid’s parallax displacement against the background stars to refine their measurement of Earth’s mean distance from the Sun, the basis for the astronomical unit. Eros was the first asteroid found (1901) to display variations in brightness due to its rotation. Those periodic light fluctuations were later used to determine its rotation period (5.27 hours), its elongated shape, and, with other observations, its size, which is about twice that of New York City’s Manhattan Island. Spectral observations established that Eros belongs to the S compositional class, analogous to the stony meteorites called ordinary chondrites, the most-common class among asteroids located in the inner part of the main asteroid belt.
In 2000 the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) Shoemaker spacecraft (launched 1996) entered orbit around Eros and collected a full year of data on its surface composition, topography, mass, gravity field, internal structure, and other properties before touching down gently on its surface. NEAR Shoemaker obtained precise dimensions (33 × 13 × 13 km [20.5 × 8 × 8 miles]), found evidence of geologic phenomena that could have originated on a much larger parent body from which Eros was derived, and obtained thousands of images revealing numerous ridges, grooves, crater chains, and boulders. A significant discovery was that Eros is an undifferentiated asteroid—i.e., it was never subjected to extensive melting and segregation into layers of distinct composition—and so may be a pristine sample of primordial solar system material.
