extraterrestrial life,  life that may exist or may have existed in the universe outside of Earth. The search for extraterrestrial life encompasses many fundamental scientific questions. What are the basic requirements for life? Could life have arisen elsewhere in the solar system? Are there other planets like Earth? How likely is the evolution of intelligent life?
No one knows which aspects of living systems are necessary, in the sense that living systems everywhere must have them, and which are contingent, in the sense that they are the result of evolutionary accidents such that elsewhere a different sequence of events might have led to different properties of life. In this respect the discovery of even a single example of extraterrestrial life, no matter how elementary in form or substance, would represent a fundamental revolution in science. Do a vast array of biological themes and counterpoints exist in the universe, or are there places with living fugues, compared with which Earth’s one tune is a bit thin and reedy? Or is Earth’s the only tune around?
Life on Earth, structurally based on carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and other elements, uses water as its interaction medium. Phosphorus, as phosphate bound to an organic residue, is required for energy storage and transport; sulfur is involved in the three-dimensional configuration of protein molecules; and other elements are present in smaller concentrations. Must these particular atoms be the atoms of life everywhere, or might there be a wide range of atomic possibilities in extraterrestrial organisms? What are the general physical constraints on extraterrestrial life?
In approaching these questions, several criteria can be used. The major atoms should tend to have a high cosmic abundance. Structural molecules of organisms at the temperature of the planet in question should not be so extremely stable that chemical reactions are impossible, but neither should they be extremely unstable, or else the organism would fall to pieces. A medium for molecular interaction must be present. Solids are inappropriate because of their inertness. The medium, most likely a liquid but possibly a very dense gas, must be stable in a number of respects. It should have a large temperature range (for a liquid, the temperature difference between freezing point and boiling point should be large). The liquid should be difficult to vaporize and to freeze; in general, it should be difficult to change its temperature. The interaction medium needs to be an excellent solvent. A fluid phase must be present on the planet in question, for material must cycle to the organism as food and away from the organism as waste.
The planet should therefore have an atmosphere and some liquid near the surface, although not necessarily a water ocean. If the intensity of ultraviolet light or charged particles from its sun is intense at the planetary surface, then some area, perhaps below the surface, should be shielded from this radiation (although some forms or intensity of radiation might permit useful chemical reactions to occur). Finally, it is imperative that conditions allow the existence of autotrophy (the ability of an organism to synthesize at least some of its own nutrients) or other means of net production of necessary compounds.
Thermodynamically, photosynthesis based on stellar radiation may be the optimal source of energy for extraterrestrial life. Photosynthetic organisms and the radiation they receive are not in thermodynamic equilibrium. On Earth, for example, a green plant may have a temperature of about 300 K (23 °C, or 73 °F); the Sun’s temperature is about 6,000 K. (K = kelvin. On the Kelvin temperature scale, in which 0 K [−273 °C, or −460 °F] is absolute zero, 273 K [0 °C, or 32 °F] is the freezing point of water, and 373 K [100 °C, or 212 °F] is the boiling point of water at one atmosphere pressure.) Photosynthetic processes are possible because energy is transported from a hotter object (the Sun) to a cooler object (Earth). Were the source of radiation at the same or at a colder temperature than the photosynthesizer, no photosynthetic activity would be possible. For this reason, the idea that a subterranean green plant will photosynthesize by use of thermal infrared radiation emitted by its surroundings is untenable. Equally unfeasible is the idea that a cold star, with a surface temperature similar to that of Earth, could sustain photosynthetic organisms.
One can use these conditions to establish the limits for the chemical requirements of life. When atoms chemically combine, the energy necessary to separate them is called the bond energy, and the measure of this energy determines how tightly the two atoms are bound to each other. Bond energies generally vary from about 10 electron volts (eV) to about 0.03 eV. Covalent bonds, where electrons are shared between atoms, tend to be more energetic than hydrogen bonds, where a hydrogen atom is shared between atoms, and hydrogen bonds in turn are more energetic than van der Waals forces, which arise from the attraction of the electrons of one atom for the nucleus of another. Atoms, free or bound, move with an average kinetic energy corresponding to about 0.02 eV. The higher the temperature, the more atoms move with energy sufficient to break a given bond spontaneously.
Specific atoms have circumscribed functions in modern biology, but, aside from structure and the need for the liquid interaction medium, they may not be fundamental. The energy-rich phosphate bonds in adenosine triphosphate (ATP), about as energetic as the hydrogen bonds, are in fact of relatively low energy. Cells store large numbers of these bonds to drive a molecular degradation or synthesis. One expects the energy currency on high-temperature worlds to be much more energetic per bond and on low-temperature worlds to be much less energetic per bond.
In The Fitness of the Environment (1913), American biochemist Lawrence Joseph Henderson first stressed the advantages of carbon and water for life in terms of comparative chemistry. Henderson was struck by the fact that the very atoms needed are exactly those that are around. It remains a remarkable fact that the atoms most useful for life have very high cosmic abundances.
