Gian Domenico Cassini, French Jean-Dominique Cassini,  (born June 8, 1625, Perinaldo, Republic of Genoa [Italy]—died September 14, 1712, Paris, France), Italian-born French astronomer who, among others, discovered the Cassini Division, the dark gap between the rings A and B of Saturn; he also discovered four of Saturn’s moons. In addition, he was the first to record observations of the zodiacal light.
Cassini’s early studies were principally observations of the Sun, but after he obtained more powerful telescopes, he turned his attention to the planets. He was the first to observe the shadows of Jupiter’s satellites as they passed between that planet and the Sun. His observation of spots on the surface of the planet allowed him to measure Jupiter’s rotational period. In 1666, after similar observations of Mars, he found the value of 24 hours 40 minutes for Mars’s rotational period; it is now given as 24 hours 37 minutes 22.66 seconds. Two years later he compiled a table of the positions of Jupiter’s satellites that was used in 1675 by the Danish astronomer Ole Rømer to establish that the speed of light is finite. In addition, he wrote several memoirs on flood control, and he experimented extensively in applied hydraulics.
Hearing of Cassini’s discoveries and work, King Louis XIV of France invited him to Paris in 1669 to join the recently formed Académie des Sciences. Cassini assumed the directorship of the Observatoire de Paris after it was completed in 1671, and two years later he became a French citizen.
Continuing the studies begun in Italy, Cassini discovered the Saturnian satellites Iapetus (1671), Rhea (1672), Tethys (1684), and Dione (1684). He also discovered the flattening of Jupiter at its poles (a consequence of its rotation on its axis).  In 1672, as part of a concerted effort to determine the size of the solar system more accurately, Cassini sent his colleague, Jean Richer, to South America so that roughly simultaneous measurements of the position of Mars could be made at Paris and Cayenne, French Guiana, leading to a better value for the Martian parallax and, indirectly, for the distance of the Sun. Between 1671 and 1679 Cassini made observations of the Moon, compiling a large map, which he presented to the Académie. In 1675 he discovered the Cassini Division and expressed the opinion that Saturn’s rings were swarms of tiny moonlets too small to be seen individually, an opinion that has been substantiated. In 1683, after a careful study of the zodiacal light, he concluded that it was of cosmic origin and not a meteorological phenomenon, as some proposed.
In 1683 Cassini began the measurement of the arc of the meridian (longitude line) through Paris. From the results, he concluded that Earth is somewhat elongated (it is actually somewhat flattened at the poles). A traditionalist, he accepted the solar theory of Nicolaus Copernicus within limits, but he rejected the theory of Johannes Kepler that planets travel in ellipses and proposed that their paths were certain curved ovals, which came to be known as Cassinians, or ovals of Cassini. Although Cassini resisted new theories and ideas, his discoveries and observations unquestionably place him among the most important astronomers of the 17th and 18th centuries.
He was the first of four successive generations of Cassinis to direct the Paris Observatory.
