Great Observatories,  a semiformal grouping of four U.S. satellite observatories that had separate origins: the Hubble Space Telescope, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the Chandra X-ray Observatory, and the Spitzer Space Telescope. The grouping came about because the four would provide unprecedented spatial and temporal coverage across much of the electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays (Compton) through X-rays (Chandra) and visible light (Hubble) to the infrared (Spitzer).
The Great Observatories concept was developed in the mid-1980s by American engineer Charles Pellerin, then Director of Astrophysics at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), as a way of providing an umbrella for four large, expensive astrophysics missions that otherwise might be viewed as funding competitors. The idea was that by spanning the electromagnetic spectrum, the four would offer a comprehensive view of the universe that would help unify heretofore diverse perceptions. Comparisons were made between hearing an entire symphony rather than a solo instrument. In 1985 NASA introduced the program to the public in a full-colour booklet, The Great Observatories for Space Astrophysics, which was written by American astronomer Martin Harwit and American science writer Valerie Neal.
While linked conceptually, the four missions had vastly different origins and histories and shared little in the way of technology. Although they often joined in coordinated observing campaigns, no effort was made to consolidate their observing programs. Indeed, Spitzer was launched three years after Compton’s mission ended. Furthermore, the four were not identical in their ability to observe the heavens. Spitzer’s 0.85-metre (2.79-foot) primary mirror is about one-third the size of Hubble’s 2.4-metre (7.9-foot) primary and observes at much longer wavelengths than Hubble. Spitzer’s angular resolution is thus much coarser than Hubble’s. Because gamma rays have the shortest wavelength of all, they cannot be focused by mirrors or lenses in the same way as longer wavelength light. Therefore, Compton’s instruments used collimators and other techniques that narrowed the field of view and thus produced images coarser than those of the other three Great Observatories. Nevertheless, the four provided much sharper views of the universe than had been available previously. (Radio was not included in the Great Observatories. The long wavelength of radio waves required much larger satellites than were possible at that time, and most radio wavelengths can be detected from the ground.)
As befitted the “Great” aspect of the program, the four spacecraft (listed here in order of launch) were named for American astrophysicists who made landmark contributions in their fields:
The success of the Great Observatories has led NASA to outline a pair of Beyond Einstein Great Observatories: the International X-ray Observatory, designed to observe X-rays in finer detail than Chandra, and the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA), designed to seek gravity waves. However, NASA canceled development of these two observatories in 2011.
