Harlow Shapley,  (born November 2, 1885, Nashville, Missouri, U.S.—died October 20, 1972, Boulder, Colorado), American astronomer who deduced that the Sun lies near the central plane of the Milky Way Galaxy and was not at the centre but some 30,000 light-years away.
In 1911 Shapley, working with results given by Henry Norris Russell, began finding the dimensions of stars in a number of binary systems from measurements of their light variation when they eclipse one another. These methods remained the standard procedure for more than 30 years. Shapley also showed that Cepheid variables cannot be star pairs that eclipse each other. He was the first to propose that they are pulsating stars.
Shapley joined the staff of the Mount Wilson Observatory, Pasadena, California, in 1914. Employing the 1.5-metre (60-inch) reflecting telescope at Mount Wilson, he made a study of the distribution of the globular clusters in the Milky Way Galaxy; these clusters are immense, densely packed groups of stars, some containing as many as 1,000,000 members. He found that of the 100 clusters known at the time, one-third lay within the boundary of the constellation Sagittarius. Using the newly developed concept that RR Lyrae variable stars accurately reveal their distance by their period of variation and apparent brightness, he found that the clusters were distributed roughly in a sphere whose centre lay in Sagittarius. Since the clusters assumed a spherical arrangement, it was logical to conclude that they would cluster around the centre of the Galaxy; from this conclusion and his other distance data Shapley deduced that the Sun lies at a distance of about 50,000 light-years from the centre of the Galaxy; the number was later corrected to 30,000 light-years. Before Shapley, the Sun was believed to lie near the centre of the Galaxy. His work, which led to the first realistic estimate for the actual size of the Galaxy, thus was a milestone in galactic astronomy.
At this time, the nature of the spiral nebulae, such as that of Andromeda, was a subject of much debate. On April 26, 1920, Shapley and American astronomer Heber Curtis debated “the scale of the Universe” at a meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. Their “Great Debate,” as it came to be called, had no clear winner. Curtis did not believe in Shapley’s size for the Milky Way, but his belief that the spiral nebulae were other galaxies (“island universes”) proved correct. Shapley had correctly appreciated the Galaxy’s great size but posited a universe consisting entirely of the Milky Way with the spiral nebulae as objects like the globular clusters.
In addition to his studies of the Galaxy, Shapley studied the neighbouring galaxies, especially the Magellanic Clouds, and found that galaxies tend to occur in clusters, which he called metagalaxies. In 1953 he proposed the “liquid water belt” theory, which stated that a planet had to be a certain distance from its star to develop an atmosphere and have liquid water, and therefore life. This concept is now called the habitable zone. Shapley became professor of astronomy at Harvard University, later director of Harvard College Observatory (1921–52), and was made director emeritus and Paine Professor of Astronomy at Harvard in 1952. His works include Star Clusters (1930), Flights from Chaos (1930), Galaxies (1943), The Inner Metagalaxy (1957), and Of Stars and Men: The Human Response to an Expanding Universe (1958; film 1962). He was the father of Nobel Prize-winning economist Lloyd Shapley.
