Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA),  astronomical research institution headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S., on the campus of Harvard University. The CfA was created in 1973 by reorganizing the Harvard College Observatory and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory under one director.
The Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics is organized into seven scientific divisions—atomic and molecular physics, high-energy astrophysics, optical and infrared astronomy, planetary sciences, radio and geoastronomy, solar and stellar physics, and theoretical astrophysics—and an education department. Some of its activities and staff are managed by the Smithsonian Institution, some by Harvard-administered interests, and some in combination. The CfA’s planetary sciences division is home to the International Astronomical Union’s Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams, which is responsible for disseminating information worldwide on transient astronomical phenomena such as new comets, novas, and supernovas, and its Minor Planet Center, which collects, checks, and disseminates observations and orbital data on asteroids and comets, including near-Earth objects. Major research emphases at the CfA include space-based X-ray astronomy, ground-based gamma-ray astronomy, the application of computers to problems of theoretical astrophysics, and the development of very long baseline interferometry techniques for radio astronomy.
Observational facilities of the CfA exist on the grounds of the Harvard College Observatory, where its original 38-cm (15-inch) refractor is housed. The centre also operates a submillimetre-wave telescope at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station; the Magellan Telescopes, two 6.5-metre (21-foot) optical telescopes at the Las Campanas Observatory in Chile; the Submillimeter Array, eight 6-metre (20-foot) radio telescopes on top of Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii; and the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory on Mount Hopkins, south of Tucson, Arizona, where the MMT Observatory is operated jointly by the CfA and the University of Arizona. In addition, the CfA provides scientific management for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s space-based Chandra X-ray Observatory.
The Harvard College Observatory was founded in 1839 by the Harvard Corporation at a time when few such facilities existed in the United States. Its 38-cm refractor rivaled the largest in the world at its opening in 1847. Under the directorship of Edward Charles Pickering from 1877 to 1919, the observatory became the world’s major producer of stellar spectra and magnitudes, established an observing station in Peru, and applied mass-production methods to the analysis of data. In Pickering’s wake, Harlow Shapley directed the observatory into the early 1950s, expanding its scope into galactic and extragalactic research and increasing its telescopic power with the establishment of the Oak Ridge station, crowned with a 155-cm (61-inch) reflector, the largest optical telescope on the U.S. East Coast. Shapley also attracted highly talented astrophysicists and organized them into teams, helping to make the Harvard observatory one of the largest and most productive in the world. Between Shapley’s tenure and the formation of the CfA, the observatory was directed by Donald H. Menzel and then Leo Goldberg, both of whom maintained strong programs in solar and stellar astrophysics; under Goldberg it was particularly active in space astronomy.
The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory was established in 1890 in Washington, D.C., by Samuel Pierpont Langley, the third secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, for the specific study of the Sun’s radiation. Langley’s successor as observatory director in 1906, Charles Greeley Abbot, limited the facility’s attention to the study of the amount and character of, and variations in, the Sun’s energy. For the next four decades Abbot, having become convinced that a link of predictive value existed between solar variations and the Earth’s weather, maintained a solar-monitoring program that eventually included observing stations in Chile, California, and the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt. The longevity of this narrowly focused program—and its evident lack of return—ultimately weakened the status of the observatory and threw its future into question in the early 1950s. In 1955, under a thoroughly modern director, Fred Whipple, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory relocated to Harvard University to affiliate with the Harvard College Observatory. Over the succeeding two decades its research emphasis shifted toward satellite tracking, geodesy, high-speed aerodynamics, and a number of astronomical areas.
