Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, also called H-R diagram,  in astronomy, graph in which the absolute magnitudes (intrinsic brightness) of stars are plotted against their spectral types (temperatures). Of great importance to theories of stellar evolution, it evolved from charts begun in 1911 by the Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung and independently by the U.S. astronomer Henry Norris Russell.
On the diagram stars are ranked from bottom to top in order of decreasing magnitude (increasing brightness) and from right to left by increasing temperature (spectral class). Stars of the galactic arm in which the Sun is located tend to fall into distinct regions on the diagram. The group called the main sequence extends in a rough diagonal from the upper left of the diagram (hot, bright stars) to the lower right (dim and cool). Large, bright, though cool, stars called giants and supergiants appear in the upper right, and the white dwarfs, dim, small, and hot, lie in the lower left. The Sun lies near the middle of the main sequence, and stars spend most of their lives on the main sequence. As stars burn up the hydrogen in their cores into helium, they become more luminous and cooler (because they have expanded) and therefore move off the main sequence into the upper right region of the giants and supergiants. The point at which stars move off the main sequence can be used to give the age of star clusters, because stars at the lower end of the main sequence take longer to burn their hydrogen into helium than stars at the upper end. The most massive stars explode in supernovas. Stars of a few solar masses eject their outer layers as planetary nebulae, which have a hot, luminous central star found in the upper left of the diagram. Stars like the Sun burn down to cool white dwarfs, which are found in the bottom left of the diagram.
Diagrams drawn for the same stars with colour instead of temperature plotted against magnitude give similar results and are called colour-magnitude diagrams. Colour-magnitude diagrams drawn for stars from other parts of the Milky Way Galaxy—e.g., globular clusters—show different patterns from that for the local stars.
