Hydrogen cloud, also called H I region or H i region,  interstellar matter in which hydrogen is mostly neutral, rather than ionized or molecular. Most of the matter between the stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, as well as in other spiral galaxies, occurs in the form of relatively cold neutral hydrogen gas. Neutral hydrogen clouds are easily detectable at radio wavelengths because they emit a characteristic energy at a wavelength of 21 cm.
Neutral hydrogen is dominant in clouds that have enough starlight to dissociate molecular hydrogen into atoms but lack hydrogen-ionizing photons from hot stars. These clouds can be seen as separate structures within the lower-density interstellar medium or else on the outer edges of the molecular clouds. Because a neutral cloud moves through space as a single entity, it often can be distinguished by the absorption line that its atoms or ions produce at their common radial velocity in the spectrum of a background star.
If neutral clouds at a typical pressure were left alone until they could reach an equilibrium state, they could exist at either of two temperatures: “cold” (about 80 K) or “warm” (about 8,000 K), both determined by the balance of heating and cooling rates. There should be little material in between. Observations show that these cold and warm clouds do exist, but roughly half the material is in clouds at intermediate temperatures, which implies that turbulence and collisions between clouds can prevent the equilibrium states from being reached. Cold H I regions are heated by electrons ejected from the dust grains by interstellar ultraviolet radiation incident upon such a cloud from outside. Cooling is mainly by C+ because passing electrons or hydrogen atoms can excite it from its normal energy state, the lowest, to one slightly higher, which is then followed by emission of radiation at 158 micrometres. This line is observed to be very strong in the spectrum of the Milky Way Galaxy as a whole, which indicates that a great deal of energy is removed from interstellar gas by this process. Cold H I regions have densities of 10 to 100 hydrogen atoms per cubic cm. Warm H I regions are cooled by excitation of the n = 2 level of hydrogen, which is at a much higher energy than the lowest level of C+ and therefore requires a higher temperature for its excitation. The density of 0.5 atom per cubic cm is much lower than in the colder regions. At any particular density there is far more neutral hydrogen available for cooling than C+.
