Interplanetary medium,  thinly scattered matter that exists between the planets and other bodies of the solar system, as well as the forces (e.g., magnetic and electric) that pervade this region of space. The material components of the interplanetary medium consist of neutral hydrogen, plasma gas comprising electrically charged particles from the Sun, cosmic rays, and dust particles.
Extremely small amounts of neutral (non-ionized) hydrogen have been detected throughout much of interplanetary space. At the distance of Earth’s orbit from the Sun, for example, the concentration of neutral hydrogen is about one atom per 100 cubic cm (6 cubic inches). Some of the neutral hydrogen that enters the solar system from interstellar space is ionized by sunlight and by charge exchange with the plasma emanating from the Sun, called the solar wind.
The solar wind is a flow of completely ionized gas—ions (chiefly protons) and electrons—that continuously expands outward through the solar system from the Sun’s corona. Its density decreases with distance from the Sun; at the distance of Earth’s orbit, it has a density of about 5 particles per cubic cm (0.06 cubic inch). This outflow of plasma transports the magnetic fields of force present at the surface of the Sun radially away from it. It also is responsible for deflecting the tails of the Earth’s and other planetary magnetospheres and the tails of comets away from the Sun.
Those cosmic rays detected in the vicinity of Earth comprise high-speed, high-energy atomic nuclei and electrons. Among the nuclei, the most abundant are hydrogen nuclei (protons; 90 percent) and helium nuclei (alpha particles; 9 percent). Nuclei outnumber electrons about 50 to 1. A minority of cosmic rays are produced in the Sun, especially at times of increased solar activity. The origin of those coming from outside the solar system—called galactic cosmic rays—remains to be conclusively identified, but they are thought to be produced in stellar processes such as supernova explosions.
Relatively small amounts of dust particles—often called micrometeroids—exist in the solar system, most of which appear to be orbiting the Sun in or near the plane of the solar system. Much of the dust is thought to have been produced in collisions between asteroids and in the shedding of material from comets while passing near the Sun. About 30,000 tons of interplanetary dust particles are estimated to enter Earth’s upper atmosphere annually.
The magnetic field lines that are carried outward from the Sun by the solar wind remain attached to the Sun’s surface. Because of the Sun’s rotation, the lines are drawn into a spiral structure. Closely associated with the interplanetary magnetic field are electric forces that act to attract or repel charged particles.
