Io, also called Jupiter I,  innermost of the four large moons (Galilean satellites) discovered around Jupiter by the Italian astronomer Galileo in 1610. It was probably also discovered independently that same year by the German astronomer Simon Marius, who named it after Io of Greek mythology. Io is the most volcanically active body in the solar system.
Io rotates at the same rate that it revolves around Jupiter (1.769 Earth days) and so always keeps the same face to Jupiter. Its nearly circular orbit has an inclination of only 0.04° to Jupiter’s equatorial plane and a radius of about 422,000 km (262,000 miles). The orbit is forced to be slightly eccentric by a gravitational resonance between Io and the Jovian moon Europa. The forced eccentricity causes intense tidal heating of Io—heating from internal friction due to continual flexing of the satellite—by Jupiter’s powerful gravitational field, which is the source of energy that powers the volcanoes.
Io is about 3,640 km (2,260 miles) in diameter, a little larger than Earth’s Moon. Its average density of about 3.52 grams per cubic cm is characteristic of rocks but not ices. Io has a very tenuous atmosphere, composed in large part of sulfur dioxide. Its surface is a startling, vividly coloured landscape of erupting volcanic vents, pools and solidified flows of lava, and deposits of sulfur and sulfur compounds. There is no evidence of impact craters on this geologically young surface. The volcanic flows are so extensive and frequent that they are resurfacing the entire satellite to a depth of several metres every few thousand years. Beneath the crust lies a layer of molten rock and a core of molten iron and iron sulfide approximately 1,800 km (1,110 miles) in diameter.
When the Voyager 1 spacecraft flew by Io on March 5, 1979, it observed nine active volcanoes ejecting fountains of fine particles several hundred kilometres into space. Observations at higher resolution by the Galileo spacecraft some 20 years later indicated that as many as 300 volcanoes may be active on the satellite at a given time. The silicate lava that is spewing out is extremely hot (approximately 1,900 K [3,000 °F, 1,630 °C]) and resembles lavas produced more than three billion years ago on Earth. Volcanic material ejected from the surface creates a toroidal (doughnut-shaped) cloud of charged particles that follows Io’s orbit and wraps part of the way around Jupiter. The ejected material contains mostly ionized atoms of oxygen, sodium, and sulfur with smaller amounts of hydrogen and potassium. As the satellite travels in its orbit, passing through the magnetic field of Jupiter, it produces an electric current of some five million amperes along a flux tube of spiraling electrons that links Io with the giant planet.
