Johann Daniel Titius,  Titius also spelled Tietz,  (born Jan. 2, 1729, Konitz, Prussia [now Chojnice, Pol.]—died  Dec. 11, 1796, Wittenberg, Saxony [now in Germany]), Prussian astronomer, physicist, and biologist whose law (1766) expressing the distances between the planets and the Sun was popularized by German astronomer Johann Elert Bode in 1772.
Having received a degree from the University of Leipzig (1752), Titius joined the faculty of the University of Wittenberg in 1756. Titius proposed his law of planetary distances in an unsigned interpolation in his German translation of Swiss philosopher Charles Bonnet’s Contemplation de la nature (“Contemplation of Nature”). Titius fixed the scale by assigning 100 to the distance of Saturn from the Sun. On this scale, Mercury’s distance from the Sun is approximately 4. Titius therefore proposed that the sequence of planetary distances (starting from Mercury and moving outward) has the form
4, 4 + 3, 4 + 6, 4 + 12, 4 + 24, 4 + 48, 4 + 96, …
There was an empty place at distance 28, or 4 + 24 (between Mars and Jupiter), which, Bode asserted, the Founder of the Universe surely had not left unoccupied. Titius’s sequence stopped with Saturn, the most distant planet then known. His law was reprinted, without credit, by Bode in the second edition of his Deutliche Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels (1772; “Clear Guide to Knowledge of the Starry Heaven”). In later editions, Bode did credit Titius, but this mostly escaped notice, and during the 19th century the law was usually associated with Bode’s name.
The Titius-Bode law (also called Bode’s law) proved to be accurate in accounting for the average distance between the Sun and the first asteroids (discovered in 1801), which were found in the gap at distance 28 and also for the distance between the Sun and Uranus (discovered in 1781). It did not, however, accurately predict the distance of Neptune. Although best known for his law, Titius was also active in physics, concentrating on thermometry, and in biology, classifying plants, animals, and minerals.
