Joseph Kerwin, in full Joseph Peter Kerwin,  (born Feb. 19, 1932, Oak Park, Ill., U.S.), U.S. astronaut and physician who served as science pilot on Skylab 2, the first manned mission to the first U.S. space station.
Kerwin received his degree in medicine in 1957 from Northwestern University Medical School in Chicago, Ill., after which he joined the U.S. Navy Medical Corps. In 1965 the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) chose him to be an astronaut.
On May 14, 1973, the unmanned Skylab space station was launched but sustained serious damage in the process. One of Skylab’s solar arrays was torn off; the other did not open. A sun shield designed to keep the station cool was also torn away, causing temperatures inside to reach 54 °C (129 °F). In an effort to save the space station, Kerwin, along with commander Charles Conrad, Jr., and command module pilot Paul Weitz, were launched on May 25, 1973, from Cape Kennedy to rendezvous with Skylab. Kerwin helped repair the damaged space station and, as the first physician to participate in a U.S. spaceflight, monitored the physical effects (particularly of prolonged weightlessness) of the space environment on the crew. The astronauts successfully completed their mission and returned to Earth on June 22.
Kerwin subsequently worked at the astronaut office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Tex. From 1982 to 1983 he was NASA’s senior science representative in Australia, and from 1983 to 1987 he was director of space and life sciences at the JSC. He was in charge of the team that investigated the cause of death of the seven astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster. He left NASA in 1987 for the aerospace company Lockheed, where he managed several projects connected with the International Space Station. In 1997 he became president of Krug Life Sciences, an American company that provided medical services for the JSC. In 1998 Krug was bought by Wyle Laboratories, an American defense engineering company, and Kerwin became a senior vice president at Wyle. He retired in 2004.
