Keck Observatory, in full W.M. Keck Observatory,  astronomical observatory located near the 4,200-metre (13,800-foot) summit of Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano on north-central Hawaii Island, Hawaii, U.S. Keck’s twin 10-metre (394-inch) telescopes, housed in separate domes, constitute the largest optical telescope system of the burgeoning multi-observatory science reserve located on Mauna Kea.
Construction of the Keck Observatory was funded primarily by the W.M. Keck Foundation, a philanthropic organization established by William Myron Keck, founder of Superior Oil Company. The first Keck telescope, Keck I, was completed in 1992 and the second, Keck II, in 1996. The observatory is operated as a consortium led by the California Institute of Technology and the University of California, which created the California Association for Research in Astronomy to maintain and operate the facility. Since 1996 the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has participated as a full partner. With the University of Hawaii, which manages the Mauna Kea reserve, they share the use of the facility.
Of Keck Observatory’s overall design, the 10-metre primary mirrors were the most technically challenging components to develop, and their fabrication broke new ground in telescope making. Each mirror consists of 36 hexagonal segments of a special zero-expansion (very low thermal expansion) glass-ceramic material fabricated by Schott Glassworks in Mainz, Germany, and polished by Itek Optical Systems in Lexington, Massachusetts. The individual 1.8-metre- (71-inch-) diameter segments form a mosaic, with each segment continually positioned by three highly precise, computer-controlled actuators such that the entire mirror surface conforms to a hyperboloid with a focal length of 17.5 metres (689 inches). To shape the asymmetrical surface of each off-axis element, Itek opticians developed a technique called stressed mirror polishing, in which the element is deformed in a vise as it is polished; when the stress is removed, the element assumes the desired asymmetrical figure.
Each of the telescope optical systems at Keck is mounted in a lightweight, rigid, open-truss framework that moves in altitude and azimuth together to follow the diurnal motion of the heavens. The extremely compact design of the telescopes helped to reduce the size and cost of the domes that house them.
The Keck telescopes embody the kinds of innovations in technology, funding, and management that, beginning in the 1960s, transformed the way large optical instruments are conceived, designed, built, and operated. A system of adaptive optics to counteract the blurring effects of the atmosphere was installed in 1999, and an interferometer that links the light paths of the two telescopes became operational in 2001. With this instrumentation in place the optically integrated telescopes have the resolving power of a single telescope with a mirror 85 metres (3,350 inches) in diameter.
Among the significant discoveries made with the Keck telescopes were the transits of HD 209458 b, the first planet to be seen eclipsing its star. Infrared observations of stars orbiting around the centre of the Milky Way Galaxy demonstrated the presence of a black hole with a mass equivalent to 3,600,000 Suns. Dysnomia, the moon of the dwarf planet Eris, was discovered with the Keck telescopes, and subsequent observations of its orbit showed that Eris is the largest dwarf planet.
