Long March, Chinese Chang Zheng,  family of Chinese launch vehicles. Like those of the United States and Soviet Union, China’s first launch vehicles were also based on ballistic missiles. The Long March 1 (LM-1, or Chang Zheng 1) vehicle, which put China’s first satellite into orbit in 1970, was based on the Dong Feng 3 intermediate-range ballistic missile, and the Long March 2 family of launch vehicles, which has been used for roughly half of Chinese launches, was based on the Dong Feng 5 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). There are several models of the LM-2 vehicle, with different first stages and solid strap-ons; an LM-2F vehicle was used to launch the first Chinese astronaut, Yang Liwei, into space in October 2003. There are also LM-3 and LM-4 launchers. The LM-3 is optimized for launches to geostationary orbit, and the LM-4, first launched in 1988, uses hypergolic propellants rather than the conventional kerosene–liquid oxygen combination used in previous Long March variants.
China has developed a second-generation family of launchers, identified as LM-5, LM-6, and LM-7, that are not based on an ICBM design. All three had their first flight in 2016. The LM-5 can launch payloads to geostationary orbit that are more than five times heavier than those carried by the LM-4. The LM-6 is designed to launch small payloads of about 1,000 kg (2,200 pounds) to low Earth orbit. The LM-7 launched slightly smaller payloads than those carried by the LM-5. Aside from this second-generation family, China has also built a small solid-fuel rocket, the LM-11, which can be launched from either a floating barge or a mobile launcher and which had its first flight in 2015.
China is developing two new Long March launch vehicles. The LM-8 has a central core with two solid-fueled boosters on the side and is scheduled to have its first flight in 2021. The first stage would return to Earth along with the boosters for future reuse. The LM-8 is designed to launch payloads of up to five tonnes to Sun-synchronous orbit (a special kind of polar orbit in which a satellite keeps the same position relative to the Sun so that it passes over a certain point at the same local time every day). The LM-9 will be a super-heavy-lift launch vehicle and China’s largest rocket ever. It is designed to lift payloads of 140 tonnes to Earth orbit and 44 tonnes to Mars. Its first test launch is scheduled for 2030, and its mission is planned to be a Mars sample return probe.
