Maarten Schmidt,  (born Dec. 28, 1929, Groningen, Neth.), Dutch-born American astronomer whose identification of the wavelengths of the radiation emitted by quasars (quasi-stellar objects) led to the theory that they may be among the most distant, as well as the oldest, objects ever observed.
Schmidt was educated at the universities of Groningen and Leiden. He received a Ph.D. from Leiden in 1956 and was scientific officer of the Leiden Observatory until 1959. He joined the staff of the Hale Observatories (now Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories) in California in 1959, at the same time joining the faculty of astronomy at the California Institute of Technology. His early work included the creation of a mathematical model of the Milky Way Galaxy based on all the available data concerning the distribution of the stars and interstellar gas and dust. Schmidt’s model led to greater understanding of the structure of the galaxy and its dynamical properties.
An even more important achievement, however, was Schmidt’s study of an unusual extragalactic phenomenon, quasars, which he and other astronomers in the 1960s came to believe were exceptionally distant from Earth and were receding from Earth with a velocity greater than that of any other known celestial object. In their searches through space, Schmidt and his colleagues found quasars receding so quickly and existing so far away that their light may have been traveling up to 15 billion years in order to reach Earth. Some astronomers, including Schmidt, theorized that these very distant and very old quasars are actually galaxies in the early stages of formation. Thus, Schmidt’s discovery and interpretation of quasars challenged many previously accepted theories of the origin and age of the universe.
From 1978 to 1980 Schmidt was the last director of the Hale Observatories and supervised separating the administration of the Palomar and Mount Wilson Observatories. From 1984 to 1986 he was president of the American Astronomical Society, and from 1983 to 1995 he served on the board of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, the last three years as chairman.
