Magellanic Cloud,  either of two satellite galaxies of the Milky Way Galaxy, the vast star system of which Earth is a minor component. These companion galaxies were named for the Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, whose crew discovered them during the first voyage around the world (1519–22). The Magellanic Clouds were recognized early in the 20th century as companion objects to the Milky Way Galaxy. When American astronomer Edwin Hubble established the extragalactic nature of what are now called galaxies, it became plain that the Magellanic Clouds had to be separate systems.
The Magellanic Clouds are irregular galaxies that share a gaseous envelope and lie about 22° apart in the sky near the south celestial pole. One of them, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), is a luminous patch about 5° in diameter, and the other, the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC), measures less than 2° across. The Magellanic Clouds are visible to the unaided eye in the Southern Hemisphere, but they cannot be observed from most northern latitudes. The LMC is about 160,000 light-years from Earth, and the SMC lies 190,000 light-years away. The LMC and SMC are 14,000 and 7,000 light-years in diameter, respectively—smaller than the Milky Way Galaxy, which is about 140,000 light-years across.
The Magellanic Clouds were formed at about the same time as the Milky Way Galaxy, approximately 13 billion years ago. They are presently captured in orbits around the Milky Way Galaxy and have experienced several tidal encounters with each other and with the Galaxy. They contain numerous young stars and star clusters, as well as some much older stars. One of these star clusters contains R136a1, the most massive star known, with a mass 265 times that of the Sun.
The Magellanic Clouds serve as excellent laboratories for the study of very active stellar formation and evolution. For example, the Tarantula Nebula (also called 30 Doradus) is an immense ionized-hydrogen region that contains many young, hot stars. The total mass of 30 Doradus is about one million solar masses, and its diameter is 550 light-years, making it the largest region of ionized gas in the entire Local Group of galaxies. With the Hubble Space Telescope it is possible for astronomers to study the kinds of stars, star clusters, and nebulae that previously could be observed in great detail only in the Milky Way Galaxy.
