Mars Express,  European spacecraft that mapped the surface of Mars. The European Space Agency’s Mars Express was launched on June 2, 2003, from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and went into Mars orbit on December 25, 2003. Mars Express carried a colour stereo camera, an energetic neutral atoms analyzer to study how the solar wind erodes the atmosphere, a mineralogical mapping spectrometer, and atmospheric and radio science experiments.
It also carried a British lander, named Beagle 2 after HMS Beagle, the ship that carried Charles Darwin on his epoch-making voyage around the world. The 33-kg (73-pound) lander was equipped with a robotic arm to acquire soil and rock samples for X-ray, gamma-ray, and mass spectroscopy analysis. Beagle 2 descended by parachute and air-bag cushions to a site in Isidis Planitia, a sedimentary basin that may have been formed by water. It was released from Mars Express on December 19, 2003, and reached the Martian surface on December 25, but no radio contact was ever established. Beagle 2’s fate remained a mystery until 2015, when high-resolution images taken by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter showed why it had not contacted Earth: Beagle 2 had landed intact, but its antenna was still covered by its solar panels, which had not completely opened.
Meanwhile, the orbiter started returning a series of striking images of the Martian surface after settling into its operational orbit on January 28, 2004. Data from onboard instruments indicated the presence of trace quantities of methane over an area containing water ice. This finding was taken as a possible sign of microbial life on Mars. The Mars Express orbiter also deployed the Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS) instrument, which used microwave pulses to search for radar signatures of subsurface water. MARSIS found evidence of liquid water on Mars in a possible underground lake beneath the south polar cap. An ultraviolet spectrometer was used to discover aurorae on Mars. The Mars Express mission is scheduled to last until 2022.
