Mary Somerville, née Mary Fairfax,  (born December 26, 1780, Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, Scotland—died November 29, 1872, Naples, Italy), British science writer whose influential works synthesized many different scientific disciplines.
As a child, Fairfax had a minimal education. She was taught to read (but not write) by her mother. When she was 10 years old, she attended a boarding school for girls for one year in Musselburgh, Scotland. Upon her return home, she began to educate herself from the family library. She was encouraged only by her uncle, Thomas Somerville, who helped her with Latin.
In 1804 Fairfax married a cousin, Samuel Greig, who was a captain in the Russian navy and the Russian consul in London. She continued to study mathematics, but, as she later wrote, “Although my husband did not prevent me from studying, I met with no sympathy whatever from him, as he had a very low opinion of the capacity of my sex.” After Samuel’s death in 1807, she had the freedom to dedicate herself to her mathematical studies. She was married again in 1812, to another cousin, William Somerville, who took pride in his wife’s educational accomplishments. She began to study botany and geology. In 1816 the Somervilles moved to London, where they became friends with such eminent scientists as astronomers Sir William Herschel and Caroline Herschel, metallurgist William Hyde Wollaston, physicist Thomas Young, and mathematician Charles Babbage, who showed the Somervilles the mechanical calculators he was making. On a trip to Europe in 1817, Somerville met French physicist François Arago and French mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace. She published her first scientific paper, “On the Magnetizing Power of the More Refrangible Solar Rays,” in 1826.
In 1827 Somerville was asked by the lawyer Henry Brougham to prepare for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge—which intended to make good books available at low prices to the working class—a condensed version of Laplace’s five-volume work Traité de mécanique céleste (Celestial Mechanics, 1798–1827), which offered a complete mechanical interpretation of the solar system. After four years Somerville finished, but Brougham deemed the work too long. However, astronomer Sir John Herschel considered the book excellent and recommended Mechanism of the Heavens (1831) to another publisher. Mechanism of the Heavens’s introduction, in which Somerville summarized the current state of astronomical knowledge for the general reader, was published separately in 1832 as Preliminary Dissertation to the Mechanism of the Heavens. Mechanism of the Heavens was acclaimed by British mathematicians and astronomers. The Royal Society commissioned a marble bust of Somerville from sculptor Francis Chantrey. Somerville and Caroline Herschel were made the first women honorary members of the Royal Astronomical Society.
Somerville’s next book, The Connection of the Physical Sciences (1834), was even more ambitious in summarizing astronomy, physics, geography, and meteorology. She wrote nine subsequent editions over the rest of her life to update it. In the third edition, published in 1836, she wrote that difficulties in calculating the position of Uranus may point to the existence of an undiscovered planet. This hint inspired British astronomer John Couch Adams to begin the calculations that ultimately led to the discovery of Neptune. In 1835, on the recommendation of Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel, Somerville received a pension of £200 per year (later £300) from the Civil List. The Somerville family went to Italy in 1838 because of her husband’s ill health, and she spent the rest of her life there.
Somerville’s next book, Physical Geography (2 vol., 1848), was the first textbook on the subject in English and her most popular work. Physical Geography was influential in that “political and arbitrary divisions are disregarded” and “man himself is viewed but as a fellow-inhabitant of the globe with other created things, yet influencing them to a certain extent by his actions, and influenced in return.” While writing it, she was discouraged by the appearance of the first volume of German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt’s Kosmos (1845), which covered similar subject matter. However, Sir John Herschel encouraged her to publish her book. Six editions of Physical Geography were published in her lifetime. In 1869 Somerville received the Patron’s Medal of the Royal Geographical Society for Physical Geography. Her final book, On Molecular and Microscopic Science (2 vol., 1869), was not as well received as her previous works. Her autobiography, Personal Recollections, from Early Life to Old Age (1873), was edited by her daughter Martha and published posthumously.
