Meteor and meteoroid,  respectively, a glowing streak in the sky (meteor) and its cause, which is a relatively small stony or metallic natural object from space (meteoroid) that enters Earth’s atmosphere and heats to incandescence. In modern usage the term meteoroid, rather than being restricted to objects entering Earth’s atmosphere, is applied to any small object in orbit around the Sun having the same nature as those that result in meteors.
When a meteoroid enters Earth’s atmosphere, it is traveling at very high velocity—more than 11 km per second (25,000 miles per hour) at minimum, which is many times faster than a bullet leaving a gun barrel. Frictional heating, produced by the meteoroid’s energetic collision with atmospheric atoms and molecules, causes its surface to melt and vaporize and also heats the air around it. The result is the luminous phenomenon recognized as a meteor. Popular synonyms for meteors include shooting stars and falling stars. The vast majority of meteoroids that collide with Earth burn up in the upper atmosphere. If a meteoroid survives its fiery plunge through the atmosphere and lands on Earth’s surface, the object is known as a meteorite.
The term meteoroid is usually reserved for chunks of matter that are approximately house-sized—i.e., some tens of metres across—and smaller. Meteoroids are believed to be mostly fragments of asteroids and comets and are placed, with them, in the category of solar system objects known as small bodies. A few meteoroids also have come from the Moon, Mars, Vesta, and possibly Mercury. The smallest meteoroids, those less than a few hundred micrometres across (about the size of a period on a printed page), are called interplanetary dust particles or micrometeoroids.
The terms meteoroid and meteor (and meteorite as well) are sometimes confusingly interchanged in common usage. Meteor in particular is often applied to a meteoroid hurtling through space, to an incandescent meteoroid (rather than just its luminous streak) in the atmosphere, or to an object that has hit the ground or a man-made object. An example of the last case is found in the name Meteor Crater, a well-known impact structure in Arizona, U.S.
