Precession of the equinoxes,  motion of the equinoxes along the ecliptic (the plane of Earth’s orbit) caused by the cyclic precession of Earth’s axis of rotation.
In compiling his famous star catalog (completed in 129 bce), the Greek astronomer Hipparchus noticed that the positions of the stars were shifted in a systematic way from earlier Babylonian (Chaldean) measures. This indicated that it was not the stars that were moving but rather the observing platform—Earth. Such a motion is called precession and consists of a cyclic wobbling in the orientation of Earth’s axis of rotation with a period of 25,772 years. Precession was the third-discovered motion of Earth, after the far more obvious daily rotation and annual revolution. Precession is caused by the gravitational influence of the Sun and the Moon acting on Earth’s equatorial bulge. To a much lesser extent, the planets exert influence as well.
The projection onto the sky of Earth’s axis of rotation results in two notable points at opposite directions: the north and south celestial poles. Because of precession, these points trace out circles on the sky. Today the north celestial pole points to within just 1° of the arc of Polaris. It will point closest to Polaris about 2100 ce. In 12,000 years the north celestial pole will point about 5° from Vega. Presently, the south celestial pole does not point in the vicinity of any bright star.
Also moving with this wobble is the projection onto the sky of Earth’s Equator. This projection, a great circle, is called the celestial equator. The celestial equator intersects another useful great circle, the ecliptic. As Earth orbits the Sun, the constantly changing direction from which the Sun is viewed causes it to trace out the ecliptic. The celestial equator is inclined at a 23.44° angle to the ecliptic (the so-called obliquity of the ecliptic). The celestial equator and the ecliptic intersect at two points called the equinoxes (vernal and autumnal). During the course of the year, as Earth orbits the Sun, the latter is seen crossing the Equator twice, in March moving from the Southern Hemisphere into the Northern Hemisphere and in September moving in the opposite direction. The equinoxes drift westward along the ecliptic at the rate of 50.3 arcseconds annually as the celestial equator moves with Earth’s precession.
