Transit,  in astronomy, the passage of a relatively small body across the disk of a larger body, usually a star or a planet, occulting only a very small area. Mercury and Venus periodically transit the Sun, and a moon may transit its planet. Extrasolar planets (e.g., HD 209458b) have been discovered when they perform a transit of their stars. Compare eclipse.
A transit of Mercury or Venus across the face of the Sun, as seen from Earth, occurs at inferior conjunction, when the planet lies between the Sun and Earth. Because the orbits of both planets are inclined to the ecliptic, these planets usually pass above or below the Sun. Each planet’s orbit intersects the ecliptic plane in two points called nodes; if inferior conjunction occurs at a time when the planet is near a node, a transit of the Sun can occur.
For Mercury these times occur around May 8 and November 10. November transits occur at intervals of 7, 13, or 33 years, whereas May transits occur only at the latter two intervals. On average, Mercury transits the Sun about 13 times per century. Mercury’s dark disk measures only about 10 arc seconds in diameter, compared with the Sun’s diameter of 1,922 arc seconds. Recent transits of Mercury occurred on November 8, 2006, and May 9, 2016, and the next will occur on November 11, 2019, and November 13, 2032. Observers cannot see Mercury’s tiny disk against the Sun without some form of magnification.
Transits of Venus occur at its nodes in December and June and generally follow a recurrence pattern of 8, 121, 8, and 105 years before starting over. Following the transits of December 9, 1874, and December 6, 1882, the world waited 121 years until June 8, 2004, for the next transit to occur and then 8 years for the next on June 5–6, 2012. The next transits will occur on December 11, 2117, and December 8, 2125. Unlike a transit of Mercury, a transit of Venus can be watched without magnification through a suitable dark filter or as an image projected on a screen through a pinhole lens.
Observing the transits of Venus was of great importance to 18th- and 19th-century astronomers, because careful timings of the events permitted accurate measurement of the distance between Venus and Earth. This distance in turn allowed calculation of the distance between Earth and the Sun, called the astronomical unit, as well as the distances to the Sun of all the other planets.
When a planet whose orbit is oriented in space such that it periodically passes between its star and a telescope, it transits the star and causes a drop in the brightness of the star. Transit observations reveal the sizes of extrasolar planets as well as their orbital periods. Radial velocity data can be combined with transit measurements to yield precise planetary masses as well as the densities of transiting planets and thereby limit the possible materials of which the planets are composed. Spectroscopic studies that rely on variations in the depth of the transit with wavelength have been used to identify gases such as hydrogen, sodium, and methane in the upper atmospheres of some close-in giant planets. The first detected transiting planet was HD 209458b in 1999, and hundreds of planets have been discovered through their transits. The transit technique is most sensitive to large planets orbiting close to their stars.
