Triton,  largest of Neptune’s moons, whose unusual orbital characteristics suggest that it formed elsewhere in the solar system and was later captured by Neptune. It was discovered by the English astronomer William Lassell in October 1846, only a few weeks after the discovery of Neptune itself. Triton was named after a merman in Greek mythology who was the son of the sea god Poseidon (the Roman god Neptune).
Triton is unique among the large moons of the solar system in that it moves in a retrograde orbit—i.e., one that is opposite the direction of Neptune’s rotation. Its mean orbital distance is about 354,800 km (220,500 miles) from the planet. Also unusual for a large moon is Triton’s orbital inclination—the plane of its orbit is tilted more than 157° to Neptune’s equator. Triton rotates once on its axis every 5.877 days, which is the same time that it takes to revolve around Neptune. As a result of this synchronous rotation, the moon always keeps the same face toward Neptune and leads with the same face in its orbit. Each of Triton’s seasons, like those of Neptune, lasts nearly 41 years, or one-fourth of Neptune’s orbital period. Triton’s orbital tilt and its axial tilt of 30° with respect to Neptune’s orbit combine in such a way that the moon’s poles alternately point toward the Sun, much like the case of Uranus. (For comparative data about Triton and other Neptunian satellites, see the table.)
Little was known about Triton until 1989, when the U.S. Voyager 2 probe flew within 40,000 km (24,800 miles) of it. As measured by Voyager, Triton is about 2,706 km (1,681 miles) across, which is nearly the diameter of Earth’s Moon. Pre-Voyager estimates of Triton’s size made from Earth had been based on an erroneously high mass determination and an assumption of low surface reflectivity. Triton’s mass is now known to be only a small fraction of the previously accepted value and its surface to be icy and highly reflective, in contrast to the Moon’s dark surface, which is devoid of water and other volatile components (with the exception of what is interpreted as water ice on the floors of craters near its poles). Triton’s low mass is likely a consequence of a predominantly water-ice interior surrounding a denser rocky core. Nevertheless, its mean density of 2.06 grams per cubic cm is higher than that measured for any of the satellites of Saturn or Uranus and is surpassed among large satellites only by the Moon and Jupiter’s Io and Europa.
Triton’s visible surface is covered by methane and nitrogen ices. Spectroscopic studies from Earth also reveal evidence of trace amounts of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide ices. Even at the remarkably low surface temperature of 38 K (−390 °F, −235 °C) measured by Voyager, a sufficient amount of frozen nitrogen sublimes (passes from a solid directly to a gas) to form a tenuous atmosphere having a near-surface pressure less than 0.00002 bar. During the Voyager flyby, a polar ice cap presumably composed of nitrogen ice deposited the prior winter covered most of Triton’s southern hemisphere. At that time Triton was nearly three-fourths of the way through its 41-year southern springtime. Equatorward of the polar cap, much of the terrain had the appearance of a cantaloupe rind, consisting of dimples crisscrossed with a network of fractures.
Within the polar cap region, numerous darker streaks provide evidence of surface winds. At least two of the streaks, and perhaps dozens, are the result of active geyserlike plumes seen erupting during the Voyager 2 flyby. Nitrogen gas, escaping through vents in the overlying ice, carries entrained dust particles to heights of about 8 km (5 miles), where the dust is then transported downwind as far as 150 km (90 miles). The energy sources and mechanisms for driving these plumes are not yet well understood, but their preference for latitudes illuminated vertically by the Sun has led to the conclusion that incident sunlight is an important factor.
Near the equator on the Neptune-facing side of Triton exist at least two, and perhaps several, frozen lakelike features with terraced edges. The terracing is probably the result of multiple epochs of melting, each successive melt involving a somewhat smaller patch of ice. Some of the terrace cliffs rise more than 1 km (0.6 mile) high. Even at Triton’s low surface temperature, nitrogen or methane ice is not strong enough to support structures of that height without slumping. Scientists assume that the underlying material in these structures is water ice, which is much more rocklike at low temperatures, although no direct evidence for it is seen in Triton’s spectra. A thin veneer of nitrogen or methane ice could effectively hide the spectral signature of water ice.
