Trojan asteroid, also called Trojan planet,  any one of a number of asteroids that occupy a stable Lagrangian point in a planet’s orbit around the Sun.
In 1772 the French mathematician and astronomer Joseph-Louis Lagrange predicted the existence and location of two groups of small bodies located near a pair of gravitationally stable points along Jupiter’s orbit. Those are positions (now called Lagrangian points and designated L4 and L5) where a small body can be held, by gravitational forces, at one vertex of an equilateral triangle whose other vertices are occupied by the massive bodies of Jupiter and the Sun. Those positions, which lead (L4) and trail (L5) Jupiter by 60° in the plane of its orbit, are two of the five theoretical Lagrangian points in the solution to the circular restricted three-body problem of celestial mechanics. The other three stable points are located along a line passing through the Sun and Jupiter. The presence of other planets, however—principally Saturn—perturbs the Sun-Jupiter-Trojan asteroid system enough to destabilize those points, and no asteroids have been found near them. In fact, because of that destabilization, most of Jupiter’s Trojan asteroids move in orbits inclined as much as 40° from Jupiter’s orbit and displaced as much as 70° from the leading and trailing positions of the true Lagrangian points.
In 1906 the first of the predicted objects, (588) Achilles, was discovered by German astronomer Max Wolf near L4. Within a year two more were found: (617) Patroclus, located near L5, and (624) Hektor, near L4. It was later decided to continue naming such asteroids after participants in the Trojan War as recounted in Homer’s epic work the Iliad and, furthermore, to name those near the leading point after Greek warriors and those near the trailing point after Trojan warriors. With the exception of the two “misplaced” names already bestowed (Hektor, the lone Trojan in the Greek camp, and Patroclus, the lone Greek in the Trojan camp), that tradition has been maintained.
As of 2020, of the more than 7,000 Jupiter Trojan asteroids discovered, about two-thirds are located near L4, and the remainder are near L5. Astronomers estimate that 1,800–2,200 of the total existing population of Jupiter’s Trojans have diameters greater than 15 km (10 miles).
Nearly all of Jupiter’s Trojans are dark, having albedos (percentage of visual light reflected) between 0.04 and 0.10. (However, one Trojan, [4709] Ennomos, has an albedo of 0.15, which is greater than that of the Moon [0.12].) The majority belong to two compositionally distinct groups that are similar to the most-common classes of outer main-belt asteroids.
Since the discovery of Jupiter’s orbital companions, astronomers have searched for Trojan objects of Earth, Mars, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune as well as of the Earth-Moon system. It was long considered doubtful whether truly stable orbits could exist near the Lagrangian points of the smaller planets because of gravitational perturbations by the major planets. However, in 1990 an asteroid later named (5261) Eureka was discovered librating (oscillating) about the L5 point of Mars, and since then eight others have been found, one at L4 and seven at L5. Twenty-four Trojans of Neptune, all but three associated with L4, have been discovered since 2001. The first Earth Trojan asteroid, 2010 TK7, which librates around L4, was discovered in 2010, and the first Uranus Trojan, 2011 QF99, which librates around L4, was discovered the next year. Although Trojans of Saturn have yet to be found, objects librating about Lagrangian points of the systems formed by Saturn and its moon Tethys and Saturn and its moon Dione are known.
