Viktor Ambartsumian, in full Viktor Amazaspovich Ambartsumian,  (born September 5 [September 18, New Style], 1908, Tbilisi, Georgia, Russian Empire—died  August 12, 1996, Byurakan Observatory, near Yerevan, Armenia), Soviet astronomer and astrophysicist best known for his theories concerning the origin and evolution of stars and stellar systems. He was the founder of the school of theoretical astrophysics in the Soviet Union.
Ambartsumian was born of Armenian parents. His father, a prominent philologist, encouraged the development of his aptitude for mathematics and physics. In 1925 he entered the University of Leningrad (now St. Petersburg State University) with the intention of devoting his life to research in astrophysics, and in the following year he published a paper on solar activity, the first of 10 papers he published while an undergraduate. After graduating in 1928, Ambartsumian became a graduate student in astrophysics under the direction of A.A. Belopolskii at Pulkovo Observatory near Leningrad (now St. Petersburg).
From 1931 to 1943 he lectured at the University of Leningrad, where he headed the Astrophysical Department. In 1932 he advanced his theory of the interaction of ultraviolet radiation from hot stars with the surrounding gas, a theory that led to a series of papers on the physics of gaseous clouds. His statistical analysis of stellar systems in 1934–36, in which for the first time their physical properties were taken into account, was found to be applicable to many related problems, such as the evolution of double stars and star clusters. He was elected a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. in 1939 and was appointed a deputy rector of the University of Leningrad in 1941–43. His theory of the behaviour of light in a scattering medium of cosmic space, put forward in 1941–43, became an important tool in geophysics, space research, and particularly astrophysics, such as in studies of interstellar matter.
In 1943 Ambartsumian joined the Armenian Academy of Sciences in Yerevan, the capital of Armenia, and began teaching at Yerevan State University. In 1946 he organized the construction near Yerevan of the Byurakan Astronomical Observatory, where he began another successful period of activity as the observatory’s director. In 1947 he discovered a new type of comparatively recent stellar system, which he named stellar association. The most important result of his study is the conclusion that the process of star formation in the Milky Way Galaxy that contains the Sun and its planetary system still continues and, specifically, that most stars have their origin in changing systems of groups of stars.
Later, Ambartsumian studied the phenomena in the atmosphere of stars that are changing in physical characteristics, such as luminosity, mass, or density. He saw these changes as being connected with the direct release of interstellar energy in the outer layers of the stars. He also investigated nonstationary processes in galaxies. These investigations are of great importance, both for the problem of the evolution of galaxies and for the study of still-unknown properties of matter.
His textbook Theoretical Astrophysics (1958) went through many editions and translations. It contains examples of his unique and fruitful approaches to stubborn astronomical problems. In addition, he studied radio signals coming from outside the Milky Way Galaxy. He was led to conclude that these radio signals represent not colliding systems of stars, as according to a widely accepted interpretation, but the subatomic process of fission within galaxies. Therefore, according to his view, “radio galaxies” may represent systems of stars, interacting in close proximity, that were formed from superdense formations of stellar material. In support of this view, he pointed out the presence of jets, condensations, and streamers that are bluish in colour; found around certain galaxies, these are characteristics of an early stage in stellar development. Ambartsumian’s later works included Problemy sovremennoi kosmogonii (1969; “Problems of Modern Cosmogony”) and Filosofskie voprosy nauki o Vselennoi (1973; “Philosophical Problems of the Study of the Universe”).
Ambartsumian’s thought-provoking manner of presentation drew large audiences to his lectures at international symposia, where he enlivened even his most abstrusely mathematical lectures with quotations from classic and contemporary poets.
The Soviet government presented many decorations and awards to Ambartsumian. In 1947 he was elected president of the Armenian S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and a member of the Parliament of Soviet Armenia, and from 1950 he served in the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. In 1953 he was elected to full membership in the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. In 1948–56 he was vice president, and in 1961–63 president, of the International Astronomical Union. In 1968 he became president of the International Council of Scientific Unions, and he participated in activities of many foreign academies and scientific societies. He was awarded two Stalin prizes and five Orders of Lenin, among many other honours. He continued to head the Byurakan Observatory until 1988.
