Vitaly Ginzburg, in full Vitaly Lazarevich Ginzburg,  (born October 4 [September 21, Old Style], 1916, Moscow, Russia—died November 8, 2009, Moscow), Russian physicist and astrophysicist, who won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 2003 for his pioneering work on superconductivity. He shared the award with Alexey A. Abrikosov of Russia and Anthony J. Leggett of Great Britain. Ginzburg was also noted for his work on theories of radio wave propagation, radio astronomy, and the origin of cosmic rays. He was a member of the team that developed the Soviet thermonuclear bomb.
After graduating from Moscow State University (1938), Ginzburg was appointed to the P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences in 1940, and from 1971 to 1988 he headed the institute’s theory group. He also taught at Gorky University (1945–68) and at the Moscow Technical Institute of Physics (from 1968).
In the late 1940s, under the leadership of physicist Igor Tamm, he worked with colleagues Andrey Sakharov and Yury Romanov to build a thermonuclear bomb. The first design, proposed by Sakharov in 1948, consisted of alternating layers of deuterium and uranium-238 between a fissile core and a surrounding chemical high explosive. Known as Sloika (“Layer Cake”), the design was refined by Ginzburg in 1949 through the substitution of lithium-6 deuteride for the liquid deuterium. When bombarded with neutrons, lithium-6 breeds tritium, which can fuse with deuterium to release more energy. Ginzburg and Sakharov’s design was tested on August 12, 1953, and more than 15 percent of the energy released came from nuclear fusion. Ginzburg received the State Prize of the Soviet Union in 1953 and the Lenin Prize in 1966.
Ginzburg conducted his prizewinning research on superconductivity in the 1950s. First identified in 1911, superconductivity is the disappearance of electrical resistance in various solids when they are cooled below a characteristic temperature, which is typically very low. Scientists formulated various theories on why the phenomenon occurs in certain metals termed type I superconductors. Ginzburg developed such a theory, and it proved so comprehensive that Abrikosov later used it to build a theoretical explanation for type II superconductors. Ginzburg’s achievement also enabled other scientists to create and test new superconducting materials and build more powerful electromagnets.
Another significant theory developed by Ginzburg was that cosmic radiation in interstellar space is produced not by thermal radiation but by the acceleration of high-energy electrons in magnetic fields, a process known as synchrotron radiation. In 1955 Ginzburg (with I.S. Shklovsky) discovered the first quantitative proof that the cosmic rays observed near Earth originated in supernovas. Upon the discovery in 1967 of pulsars (neutron stars formed in supernova explosions), he expanded his theory to include pulsars as a related source of cosmic rays.
