Yerkes Observatory,  astronomical observatory located at Williams Bay on Lake Geneva in southeastern Wisconsin, U.S. The Yerkes Observatory of the University of Chicago was named for its benefactor, transportation magnate Charles T. Yerkes, and was opened in 1897. It contains the largest refracting telescope (40 inches [1 metre]) in the world. The refractor has been used for solar and stellar spectroscopy, photographic parallaxes, and double-star observations, while other more modern telescopes at the site have been equipped for photoelectric, polarimetric, and spectroscopic applications.
Yerkes Observatory epitomized American astronomer George Ellery Hale’s passion for building observatories with laboratories to link physics to the stars. When Hale left Yerkes in 1904 to establish Mount Wilson Observatory, his second in command and successor, stellar spectroscopist Edwin B. Frost, managed to keep the observatory open. Frost initiated formal graduate training at Yerkes, awarding the first Ph.D. in 1912.
Yerkes enjoyed a windfall when in 1926 Texas banker William J. McDonald left a bequest to the University of Texas to build an observatory. Texas, which did not have an astronomy program, approached Frost for advice, and this opened the door in 1932 to a cooperative agreement between the Universities of Chicago and Texas whereby an 82-inch (208-cm) reflector would be built in western Texas and be operated by Yerkes until Texas could build a viable program in astronomy, at which time the observatory would be used jointly. The site of the 82-inch reflector, the second largest telescope in the world at its dedication in 1939, became McDonald Observatory, near Fort Davis, Texas. McDonald, built and guided by the third Yerkes director, Russian American astronomer Otto Struve, was devoted to a wide range of astrophysical research, including stellar and planetary atmospheres and the nature of the interstellar medium. For Struve, McDonald Observatory symbolized the need in modern astrophysics for institutions to collaborate.
In his 15-year tenure as director, Struve built one of the world’s strongest and most well-balanced observatory staffs, which included theorists such as Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar and observationalists such as William Wilson Morgan. He pushed his staff to execute observational programs that centred on the application of modern physical theory. In so doing, he was probably the first truly modern director of a major American observatory.
Because of light pollution from nearby Chicago, the research that can be conducted at the Yerkes Observatory site is limited, so the present observatory staff conducts observations worldwide. Yerkes engineers and astronomers have also built instruments for other observatories, such as the airborne Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy and the Apache Point Observatory in Sunspot, N.M. 
