Irwin Rose , in full Irwin Allan Rose,  (born July 16, 1926, Brooklyn, New York, U.S.—died June 2, 2015,  Deerfield, Massachusetts), American biochemist who shared the 2004 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with Aaron J. Ciechanover and Avram Hershko for their joint discovery of the process by which the cells of most living organisms remove unwanted proteins.
Rose received a Ph.D. in biochemistry from the University of Chicago in 1952. He later served (1954–63) on the faculty at the Yale University School of Medicine and was a senior member (1963–95) of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. In 1997 he accepted a special appointment as emeritus researcher at the University of California, Irvine.
In the late 1970s and early ’80s, Ciechanover and Hershko were visiting scientists at Fox Chase, where they worked with Rose on their Nobel Prize-winning research. The process that the three men discovered involves a series of carefully orchestrated steps by which cells degrade, or destroy, the proteins that no longer serve any useful purpose. In the first step a molecule called ubiquitin (from the Latin ubique, meaning “everywhere,” because it occurs in so many different cells and organisms) attaches to the protein targeted for destruction and accompanies it to a proteasome—essentially a sac of powerful enzymes that divide the protein into its component amino acids. The outer membrane of the proteasome admits only proteins carrying a ubiquitin molecule. The ubiquitin molecule detaches before entering the proteasome, and cells reuse it to tag another protein for destruction.
Rose, Ciechanover, and Hershko also demonstrated that ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation helps control a number of other critical biochemical processes, including cell division, the repair of defects in DNA, and gene transcription, the process in which genes use their coded instructions to manufacture a protein. Such diseases as cystic fibrosis result when the protein-degradation system does not work normally. Using the findings of Rose, Ciechanover, and Hershko, researchers hoped to eventually develop drugs against such illnesses.
