Vernon Duke, original name Vladimir Aleksandrovich Dukelsky,  (born October 10, 1903, Parfyanovka, near Pskov, Russia—died  January 16, 1969, Santa Monica, California, U.S.), Russian-born American composer noted for his sophisticated melodies for films, Broadway musicals, and revues. Among his most popular songs are “April in Paris” from the revue Walk a Little Faster (1932) and “I Can’t Get Started” from Ziegfeld Follies of 1936.
After training at the Kiev Conservatory, Dukelsky at age 16 fled the Russian Revolution and settled in Constantinople (now Istanbul). Impressed upon hearing George Gershwin’s “Swanee,” he developed a lasting interest in American popular music. In 1921 he traveled to the United States and met Gershwin, who suggested the Americanization of his name and advised him, “Do not be scared about going low-brow.” However, Duke returned to Europe and concentrated on classical music, composing the ballet Zéphyr et Flore (1925) for Serge Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes as well as two symphonies.
Duke settled in the United States in 1929, and throughout the 1930s he composed background music for films and theatrical productions. His lyricists included John Latouche, E.Y. Harburg, Ira Gershwin, Ogden Nash, and Howard Dietz. His song “Banjo Eyes” was adopted by the comedian Eddie Cantor as his theme. In 1940 Duke received critical acclaim for his score for Cabin in the Sky (film 1943), a Broadway musical with an all-Black cast that featured Ethel Waters. During this time, using his original name, he also composed classical music, including the concerto Dédicaces and the oratorio The End of St. Petersburg.
In 1942 Duke wrote the music for the Coast Guard revue Tars and Spars, and in 1944 he composed the score to the Broadway staging of Sadie Thompson. He translated American popular songs into Russian for Radio Liberty broadcasts to the Soviet Union and in 1957 composed music for the Broadway production of Jean Anouilh’s Time Remembered. His autobiography, Passport to Paris, was published in 1955.
