12 Years a Slave,  American dramatic film, released in 2013, that impressed critics and audiences with its harrowing depiction of slavery in the antebellum South. The movie won the BAFTA Award and the Academy Award for best picture as well as the Golden Globe Award for best drama. Based on the autobiographical narrative (1853) of Solomon Northup, the film chronicles the grueling experiences of slavery and the dehumanizing effects of human bondage on everyone involved.
The film opens with the enslaved Solomon Northup (played by Chiwetel Ejiofor) in a sugarcane field with other slaves and then tells Northup’s story in an extended flashback. Northup was born a freeman in New York. He is married with two children and is an accomplished violinist. Two men (Scoot McNairy, Taran Killam) entice him to Washington, D.C., with the promise of a high-paid job playing music in a circus of sorts. They drug him and deliver him to a slave pen, from which he is shipped to New Orleans and sold by a slave trader (Paul Giamatti) as a runaway slave named Platt to a relatively kind plantation owner, Ford (Benedict Cumberbatch). Northup incurs the enmity of Ford’s slave handler, Tibeats (Paul Dano). Tibeats arranges to have Northup lynched, but Ford’s overseer, Chapin (J.D. Evermore), stops the lynching moments before Northup is actually hanged. Because of Tibeats’s hostility, Ford sells Northup to Epps (Michael Fassbender), a particularly vicious and alcoholic plantation owner.
On Epps’s plantation, Northup becomes friends with another slave, Patsey (Lupita Nyong’o). Epps pays particular attention to Patsey, often expressing his obsession by raping her, and his jealous wife (Sarah Paulson) frequently attacks her. At one point, Epps decides that Patsey has earned punishment, and he forces Northup to whip her. Northup’s repeated attempts to regain his freedom finally yield success when Bass (Brad Pitt), a Canadian abolitionist working as a hired hand for Epps, is convinced that Northup’s story is true and alerts the authorities in Northup’s hometown of Saratoga Springs, New York. A sheriff arrives with a neighbour of Northup’s from Saratoga, and he is released.
Northup’s memoir was researched and verified by American researchers Sue Eakin and Joseph Logsdon, and they published an annotated edition of the book in 1968. Director Steve McQueen had already expressed interest in making a film about slavery in the United States when Northup’s book was brought to his attention. McQueen was the first black producer and the first black director of a movie that won the Oscar for best picture. Kenyan actress Lupita Nyong’o made her feature film debut in 12 Years a Slave, and she won the Oscar for best supporting actress for her portrayal of Patsey.
