The stories of British runners Eric Liddell and Harold Abrahams are known to many through the 1981 Academy Award-winning film Chariots of Fire. As the movie tells it, Liddell was boarding a boat to the 1924 Paris Olympics when he discovered that the qualifying heats for his event, the 100-metre sprint, were scheduled for a Sunday. A devout Christian, he refused to run on the Sabbath and was at the last minute switched to the 400 metres.
In truth, Liddell had known the schedule for months and had decided not to compete in the 100 metres, the 4 × 100-metre relay, or the 4 × 400-metre relay because they all required running on a Sunday. The press roundly criticized the Scotsman and called his decision unpatriotic, but Liddell devoted his training to the 200 metres and the 400 metres, races that would not require him to break the Sabbath. He won a bronze medal in the 200 and won the 400 in a world-record time. Liddell ignored the media’s subsequent hero worship and soon returned to China, where he had been born, to continue his family’s missionary work. He died there in 1945 in a Japanese internment camp.
Abrahams’s religion is also a strong force in the film, which links the discrimination he faced as a Jew with his motivation to win Olympic gold in Paris. Abrahams, however, was hardly an outsider. A University of Cambridge undergraduate, he had already represented Britain at the 1920 Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium. His drive to win in Paris was fueled more by his desire to redeem his loss in Antwerp and by his rivalry with his two older brothers (one of whom had competed at the 1912 Stockholm Games) than by his status as a Jew. To achieve his goal, Abrahams hired a personal coach, the renowned Sam Mussabini, and trained with single-minded energy. He even lobbied anonymously to have himself dropped from the long-jump event (in which he had previously set a British record) so that he could concentrate on his running. The movie also errs in showing Abrahams failing in the 200 metres before eventually triumphing in the 100 metres. He actually won the 100 first; the 200-metre final was held two days later.
Abrahams suffered an injury in 1925 that ended his athletic career. He later became an attorney, radio broadcaster, and sports administrator, serving as chairman of the British Amateur Athletics Board from 1968 to 1975. He wrote widely about athletics and was the author of a number of books, including The Olympic Games, 1896–1952. He also contributed the classic article “Olympic Games” to the 15th edition of Encyclopædia Britannica.
