A Night to Remember,  British docudrama film, released in 1958, that is an adaptation of Walter Lord’s best-selling book (1955) about the sinking of the passenger liner Titanic. The movie is noted for its accuracy and emotional resonance.
A Night to Remember chronicles one of the most famous tragedies in maritime history. The Titanic was the largest and most luxurious ship of its day. It was also deemed unsinkable because of its double-bottomed hull that was divided into 16 presumably watertight compartments, four of which could be flooded without endangering the ship’s buoyancy. On April 14, 1912, the ocean liner was midway through its maiden voyage, en route to New York from Southampton, England. Shortly before midnight, however, it struck an iceberg south of Newfoundland, Canada, causing at least five compartments to rupture. At 2:20 am on April 15, some two and a half hours after the collision, the Titanic sank. More than 1,500 passengers and crew members died. The great loss of life was, in part, due to insufficient lifeboats; the Titanic had only 1,178 lifeboat places for the 2,224 people aboard. The story in the film is told mainly through the eyes of the ship’s second officer, Charles Lightoller (played by Kenneth More).
A Night to Remember placed great emphasis on authenticity. The sets were rendered from blueprints of the original ship, and various insiders were consulted during the production, including an officer of the Titanic and a commodore of the Cunard Line. The filmmakers used ingenuity to compensate for a relatively small budget. Employment of a 35-foot (10-metre) model replica of the ship with footage intercut from a 1943 German propaganda film aided in making the movie a stunning and emotionally riveting experience. It concentrates on the human drama as opposed to the spectacle.
Shot at England’s Pinewood Studios, the film boasts a cast of notable character actors, with More giving an especially memorable performance. Honor Blackman (as Mrs. Liz Lucas, a passenger annoyed by the iceberg who fails to grasp the seriousness of the situation), Sean Connery (as a crew member), and Desmond Llewelyn (in an uncredited role) would famously unite again six years later as Pussy Galore, James Bond, and Q (Bond’s quartermaster of gadgetry), respectively, in Goldfinger (1964). The maritime tragedy was later depicted in numerous films, most notably James Cameron’s Titanic (1997), which won 11 Academy Awards and became the first film to earn more than $1 billion at the box office.
