All About Eve,  American film, released in 1950, that delighted critics with its acid wit and that starred Bette Davis, Anne Baxter, and George Sanders. The movie received six Academy Awards, including that for best picture.
The film opens at a theatre awards banquet held by the fictional Sarah Siddons Society. The theatre critic Addison DeWitt (played by Sanders) narrates the scene and introduces the main characters: Karen Richards (Celeste Holm); her husband, playwright Lloyd Richards (Hugh Marlowe); the theatrical producer Max Fabian (Gregory Ratoff); aging star Margo Channing (Davis); and the recipient of the award for best actress, Eve Harrington (Baxter). The movie then recounts Eve’s rise to stardom.
Margo is performing in Fabian’s play Aged in Wood, which is directed by her lover, Bill Sampson (Gary Merrill). One evening Karen, who is a close friend of Margo’s, brings the star-struck Eve into Margo’s dressing room. Eve tells a moving story of the genesis of her devotion to Margo. Everyone is captivated except Margo’s maid and companion, Birdie (Thelma Ritter), who is openly skeptical. Margo invites Eve to live in her home and become her assistant. Eve makes herself invaluable to Margo, but Margo begins to heed Birdie’s warnings and soon comes to find Eve’s attention unsettling. Eve plans a birthday party for Bill, and Margo becomes jealous of Bill’s high opinion of Eve. It is at this party that Margo delivers the line, “Fasten your seat belts. It’s going to be a bumpy night.” DeWitt attends the party with his protégé, Miss Casswell (Marilyn Monroe), and he is introduced to Eve. Eve manipulates Margo’s friends into making her Margo’s understudy (behind Margo’s back). Margo is enraged when she finds out, but Karen, Lloyd, and Bill are appalled by Margo’s attitude toward Eve. Karen arranges for Margo to miss a performance of Aged in Wood so that Eve can go on in her stead. Forewarned, Eve invites theatre critics, and her performance is a triumph.
After the laudatory reviews appear, Margo and Bill announce their engagement at a dinner with Karen and Lloyd. Karen receives a note asking her to meet Eve in the ladies’ room. There, Eve threatens to reveal Karen’s duplicity toward Margo if Eve is not cast in the lead role in Lloyd’s new play, a part that was previously promised to Margo. When Karen returns to the table, she is surprised to hear Margo turn down the role that Eve wants. Just before the opening of the new play, Eve informs DeWitt that Lloyd is going to leave Karen and marry her and write plays for her. DeWitt responds by telling her that he knows about all her lies and manipulations, and he declares that she now belongs to him. The next scene is that of the awards ceremony, at which Eve thanks all those whom she has used. When she returns to her hotel room, she finds a star-struck young woman, Phoebe (Barbara Bates), waiting for her.
All About Eve, produced by Darryl F. Zanuck and written and directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz, was based on a short story and later radio play, both entitled The Wisdom of Eve and written by Mary Orr. Davis gave what was widely considered her most memorable screen performance in the movie, and she married Gary Merrill, who played her fiancé in the film. All About Eve was selected in 1990 for preservation in the National Film Registry. The movie’s Sarah Siddons Society inspired the founding (1952) in Chicago of a society named and patterned after the organization in the movie.
