Annie Hall,  American romantic comedy film, released in 1977, that was cowritten and directed by Woody Allen and starred Allen and Diane Keaton. The movie, with its mix of comic sequences and observations about the impermanence of romance, became a critical and popular favourite. It garnered both the Academy Award and the BAFTA Award for best picture, and Allen won BAFTA Awards and Oscars for his direction and writing.
The movie begins with Alvy Singer (played by Allen) telling the audience that he is trying to figure out why his relationship with Annie Hall ended. The story proceeds in a series of nonlinear flashbacks, beginning with several scenes from Alvy’s childhood. The scenes reveal that Alvy grew up in a house under the roller coaster at Coney Island and that he was a nervous and pessimistic child who grew up to be a comedian. The next scenes take place at a more recent time. Alvy’s friend Rob (Tony Roberts) suggests that they move to California, but Alvy is not interested. Then Alvy and Annie (Keaton) go to a movie. Later that night, Annie mentions that Alvy has been married before, introducing a flashback to Alvy’s first marriage, to Allison (Carol Kane). Another scene shows Alvy and Annie enjoying each other’s company in a seaside house as they struggle to make a dinner of boiled lobsters. During a walk on the beach, they reflect on Annie’s previous boyfriends and then introduce Alvy’s failed second marriage, to Robin (Janet Margolin). The film then shows Annie and Alvy meeting for the first time, at a tennis game with Rob, and reveals the sweet and awkward beginning of their romance.
The next scenes show Alvy and Annie arguing about the prospect of living together, about their relationship, and about sex. Alvy has Easter dinner with Annie’s family in Wisconsin; his family observes a Jewish holiday in a split screen that highlights the cultural distance between the families. Later, Annie and Alvy break up. Alvy goes on a date with Pam (Shelley Duvall), but when they are in bed together, Annie calls Alvy to tell him that there is an emergency. Alvy goes to Annie to deal with the crisis (two spiders in her bathroom), and they reconcile.
A music producer, Tony Lacey (played by musician Paul Simon), hears Annie’s nightclub act and invites Annie and Alvy to his hotel room for drinks. Later, Annie and Alvy travel to California, where Alvy is to make a television appearance and where his friend Rob now lives. The three of them attend a party hosted by Tony. On the flight back to New York City, Alvy and Annie decide to break up. Later, Alvy decides that he misses Annie terribly. He flies to California, where Annie is now living with Tony, to ask her to marry him, but she refuses. Alvy writes and produces a play about his relationship with Annie; in the play, she agrees to marry him. In the final scene, Annie and Alvy meet again as friends.
Annie Hall is loosely based on the real-life romance that occurred between Allen and Keaton. It employs various unusual devices—characters directly address the audience, speak to each other across split screens, and comment on the action of the film itself, and subtitles are used to reveal unspoken thoughts. The clothing worn by Keaton in the film launched a brief fashion trend. Annie Hall came to be regarded as a classic, and it was selected in 1992 for preservation in the National Film Registry.
