Bad Day at Black Rock,  American mystery film, released in 1955, that fused elements of the western with those of film noir. It was based on Howard Breslin’s short story “Bad Time at Honda” (1947).
Spencer Tracy starred as John Macreedy, a one-armed World War II veteran whose life was saved during the war by a Japanese American soldier. He becomes a de facto detective when in 1945 he arrives in a sparsely populated Arizona desert town in search of the soldier’s father, Komoko, in order to present him with a medal posthumously awarded to his son. The town has not had a visitor for four years, and the residents treat Macreedy with suspicion and disdain. Although he is told by the town boss, Reno Smith (Robert Ryan), that Komoko was shipped to a relocation camp for Japanese Americans at the start of the war, he decides to visit the plot of land where Komoko had lived. While there Macreedy discovers wildflowers growing in the ground, which he suspects indicates a burial site. Upon his return, some of the townspeople’s behaviour becomes increasingly intimidating, and he soon realizes that his life is in danger. Fortunately, he finds allies in Doc Velie (Walter Brennan), the town’s resident physician, and the young Pete Wirth (John Ericson), who confesses that he, Smith, and three others had murdered Komoko in retaliation for Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor. A plan is arranged for Pete’s sister, Liz (Anne Francis), to secretly transport Macreedy away from town at night, but during the drive she stops in the desert, where Smith is waiting with a rifle. After Smith unexpectedly shoots Liz, Macreedy manages to maim him with a Molotov cocktail. Back in town, Komoko’s killers are put in jail, and before departing via train, Macreedy hands over the medal to Doc, who believes it will help restore the town’s spirits.
Although Tracy had been reluctant to accept the role, he proved successful as a determined tough guy who cracks heads and witticisms with equal aptitude. (Macreedy’s  fight in a café with a local thug, played by Ernest Borgnine, is a particularly memorable scene.) The wide-screen colour cinematography contributes to the sense of desolation in the town, while André Previn’s musical score complements and accentuates the film’s drama and pathos. Additionally, the film explores myriad themes popular in Hollywood cinema of the 1950s, including individual integrity, civic responsibility, and group paranoia and conformity. Bad Day at Black Rock was one of the earliest attempts in film to deal with the Japanese American experience during World War II and anti-Japanese prejudice in the postwar years.
