Ben-Hur,  American dramatic film, released in 1959, that was arguably the best of Hollywood’s biblical epics. In addition to being a huge commercial success, it set a record for most Academy Award wins (11).
The story traces the plight of Judah Ben-Hur (played by Charlton Heston), a young Jewish prince from an influential family. As the film opens, he is reunited with his boyhood friend Messala (Stephen Boyd), who is now a Roman tribune exerting great control over Jerusalem. The two men enjoy reliving old times, but when Messala asks Ben-Hur to help stem the increasing number of protests by Jews against Roman rule, Ben-Hur declines. The resulting rift boils over when an accident leads to Ben-Hur’s being accused of trying to kill a Roman official. Although Messala knows that Ben-Hur is innocent, he allows him to be convicted of the crime; Ben-Hur’s mother and sister are imprisoned. Ben-Hur is made a slave on a Roman galley, and during a fierce battle, his ship sinks. He manages to save a high-ranking Roman official, Quintus Arrius (Jack Hawkins), who shows his gratitude by adopting him. Ben-Hur begins competing in deadly chariot races, and he gains fame for his courage and skill. During this time, he searches for his mother and sister and is told that they are dead. Seeking revenge, Ben-Hur agrees to face Messala in a chariot race. The contest is particularly grueling, but Ben-Hur emerges victorious. Messala, however, is mortally wounded, and with his dying words, he informs Ben-Hur that his beloved mother and sister are actually in a leper colony. During his quest to save his family, Ben-Hur, who has found Jesus Christ to be an inspiration in his life, witnesses the crucifixion. Soon thereafter, both his mother and sister are cured of leprosy.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer gambled $15 million—a budget bigger than that of any previous film—and the financial stability of the studio on this massive remake of the silent film classic (1925); both films were based on Lewis Wallace’s 1880 novel. The payoff was what became, at the time, the highest-grossing film ever released, earning approximately $74 million in the United States. Heston was perfectly cast as the ill-fated hero, although Ben-Hur’s religious transformation rendered the film’s final portion ponderous for some. Heston received an Academy Award for his performance. The famed chariot race is considered among cinema’s most-impressive action sequences, not least because it featured up to 15,000 extras. Ben-Hur received 12 Oscar nominations and won 11 statuettes, a number that, over the following 50 years, would be equaled only by Titanic (1997) and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003).
