Body Heat,  American crime film, released in 1981, that is one of the most significant examples of “neo-noir”—a term often used to describe movies that rework the motifs, themes, or visual effects of the golden age of film noir. Its plot bears a strong resemblance to that of one of the greatest noir films, Double Indemnity (1944).
Body Heat, set in Florida, centres on an affair between Ned Racine (played by William Hurt), a disillusioned weary lawyer, and Matty Walker (Kathleen Turner, in her movie debut), the attractive wife of a wealthy businessman. Through sexual magnetism, Matty coaxes Ned into believing he should kill her husband, Edmund (Richard Crenna), so that they can be together and benefit from his money. After an initial murder attempt is thwarted, Ned kills Edmund in the Walkers’ home and then transports the body to an abandoned business, which he sets on fire. Soon afterward, however, Ned learns that Matty has forged his signature on an alteration of Edmund’s will that allows her to collect the full inheritance. Ned’s friends Peter Lowenstein (Ted Danson), an assistant district attorney, and Oscar Grace (J.A. Preston), a detective, start to suspect him of involvement in the crime. On Matty’s instruction, Ned goes to the Walkers’ boathouse to retrieve a key piece of evidence but discovers, to his alarm, that the structure is rigged to explode when the door opens. When Matty arrives on the scene, she pleads that she loves him and volunteers to enter the boathouse herself; as she does, it goes up in flames. Later, while in prison for Edmund’s murder, Ned pieces together that his lover had assumed the identity of another woman in order to fake her own death. In the final scene, Matty relaxes on a far-away beach.
First-time director Lawrence Kasdan was lauded for his ability to emulate the style and atmosphere of classic film noir, despite the fact that Body Heat was shot in colour instead of black and white. One of the most striking visual effects occurs when Matty meets Ned by accident in a restaurant at the beginning of the film. The two figures approach each other under an archway at exactly the same time, thus creating the strange sensation that they are matched in some way or that she is a mirror reflection of his darker yet-to-be-awakened hidden self. The strong performances by Hurt and Turner helped establish them as box-office stars.
