Braveheart,  historical epic film, released in 1995, that was directed by and starred Mel Gibson and was loosely based on the story of 13th-century Scottish leader William Wallace. The movie was a surprise winner of the Academy Award for best picture.
After William Wallace’s father and brother are killed in battle against the English, Wallace is sent to continental Europe to be educated. He returns to Scotland as an adult (played by Gibson) and marries his childhood sweetheart, Murron (Catherine McCormack.) When English soldiers try to rape Murron, Wallace saves her but the soldiers make a second attempt and she is captured and executed. Wallace then leads his clan in slaughtering the English garrison, and he continues to fight to expel the English from Scotland, gaining increasing numbers of followers as stories of his exploits spread. He leads his outnumbered ranks to victory in the Battle of Stirling Bridge, and then he invades England and sacks the town of York. English King Edward Longshanks (Patrick McGoohan) sends Princess Isabelle (Sophie Marceau), his son’s wife, to negotiate peace with Wallace, but she is charmed by him and becomes his ally. She warns Wallace of an impending English invasion. Wallace seeks the support of the Scottish nobility in the fight against the English, but the nobles are reluctant. Robert the Bruce (Angus Macfadyen) is particularly torn. The Scottish fighters are crushed by an army led by King Edward in the Battle of Falkirk after members of the Scottish nobility betray Wallace. Wallace tries to kill Edward himself but is intercepted by a lancer, who proves to be Robert the Bruce. Robert then saves Wallace from being captured by the English. Wallace spends the next several years engaged in guerrilla warfare against the English. He later agrees to meet with Robert in Edinburgh, but Robert the Elder (Ian Bannen) and other nobles set a trap and capture Wallace. During his long and agonizing execution, Wallace refuses to submit to gain mercy and instead defiantly cries out, “Freedom!” In an epilogue, Robert the Bruce leads the Scottish to victory over the English in the Battle of Bannockburn.
The movie, inspired by a nearly 12,000-line epic poem about Wallace by Harry the Minstrel and filmed largely in Ireland, triggered an upsurge of interest in Scottish history, although it contained numerous historical inaccuracies and anachronisms. Critics especially praised the massively scaled and extravagantly violent battle scenes.
