Bride of Frankenstein,  American horror film, released in 1935, that is a sequel to Frankenstein (1931), with Boris Karloff reprising his role as the misunderstood monster. In contrast to the usual reputation of movie sequels, many viewers regard the film as superior to its predecessor.
Bride of Frankenstein is based on the premise that the monster has survived the angry mob’s attempt to destroy him at the end of the original film. After killing two villagers, he roams the nearby forest until he is captured and thrown in the local jail. Breaking out of his chains by brute force, he continues to wander through the woods and eventually encounters a blind hermit (played by O.P. Heggie), who soothes the beast with his violin playing and teaches him how to speak. When two hunters arrive at the hermit’s abode, however, the monster flees to a cemetery, where he comes upon Dr. Pretorius (Ernest Thesiger), an eccentric scientist who desires to create a mate for the monster with the assistance of his former student (and the monster’s creator) Dr. Henry Frankenstein (Colin Clive). Initially refusing to help, Frankenstein relents after Pretorius has the monster kidnap Frankenstein’s wife, Elizabeth (Valerie Hobson). However, once the two scientists have animated their new creation (Elsa Lanchester), a grotesque beauty with a frizzled shock of hair, even she rejects the monster by screaming at him in horror. Dejected, the monster destroys Frankenstein’s laboratory, ostensibly killing himself, his mate, and Dr. Pretorius, while allowing the Frankensteins to escape.
Lanchester played a dual role in the film, not only as the monster’s mate but also as Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, author of the novel Frankenstein, who appears briefly at the beginning of the film to set up the tale that follows. The film came under fire from the Hays Office of film standards, which insisted on a less-revealing costume for the mate, a reduction in the number of murders depicted, and the removal of a scene in which the monster attempts to “rescue” a figure of Christ on a cross. Censors in other countries took issue with a scene in which the monster looks lovingly upon the body of his theretofore unanimated mate, fearing that the scene could be interpreted as an endorsement of necrophilia. From an artistic perspective, Karloff objected to having the monster speak in the sequel, believing it harmed the poignancy of the character. Critics, however, have generally praised the film’s blend of outrageous thrills and macabre humour.
