Casino Royale,  British-American spy film, released in 1967, that is a parody of Ian Fleming’s first James Bond novel (1953). Plagued by a chaotic production, the movie is notable for being largely incoherent.
Bond (played by David Niven) is living in opulence after his retirement from MI6. However, following the mysterious murders of agents from different countries, he is coerced back into service by his former boss, M (John Huston), and other international intelligence officials. Bond learns that one of the targets of the investigation is a rich gambler named Le Chiffre (Orson Welles), who is actually a top operative in a crime syndicate known as SMERSH. Bond decides to confuse his enemies by enlisting numerous agents to adopt the name James Bond. He utilizes the services of agent Vesper Lynd (Ursula Andress) to seduce Evelyn Tremble (Peter Sellers), the world’s greatest baccarat player. Tremble agrees to pose as James Bond and challenge Le Chiffre to a high-stakes game at the famed Casino Royale, which is a front for SMERSH operations. Tremble wins the game, causing Le Chiffre to lose an enormous amount of the crime syndicate’s money—a mistake that results in Le Chiffre’s death. When Lynd is kidnapped from the casino, Tremble dashes off to rescue her. However, he discovers all too late that she is a double agent, and she kills him.
Meanwhile, the real Bond succeeds in confronting the secret head of SMERSH, Dr. Noah, who is actually his nephew Jimmy Bond (Woody Allen). Jimmy has devised a series of incredible schemes, including the elimination of all men taller than him and the development of a time-release atomic bomb concealed in a pill. A British agent (Daliah Lavi) surreptitiously slips one of the pills into Jimmy’s champagne, turning him into a walking atomic time bomb. Meanwhile, a wild battle ensues in Casino Royale, with MI6 and its allies (including U.S. agents dressed as cowboys and Indians) fighting the forces of SMERSH. No one emerges as a winner, however, because Jimmy’s bomb explodes, killing everyone in the casino.
The film is loosely based on Fleming’s Casino Royale, the only Bond book for which producers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman did not hold the rights. Rather than try and compete with the popular Sean Connery movies, the filmmakers decided to shoot the novel as a spoof. However, the production quickly spiraled out of control with five directors working simultaneously but never in conjunction with each other. Eight writers (most uncredited) also worked on the screenplay, including Billy Wilder, Joseph Heller, and Ben Hecht. In addition, there were problems with the performers, most notably Sellers, who reportedly did not get along with Welles and refused to shoot scenes with him. Eventually, Sellers left the production. The resulting film is disjointed and nearly impossible to follow. However, with an all-star cast, an outstanding production design, and a soundtrack that included Burt Bacharach and Herb Alpert, Casino Royale was a box-office hit, and it later became a cult classic. A second big-screen adaptation of Casino Royale was released in 2006 to great acclaim; a dramatic version of Fleming’s novel, it starred Daniel Craig.
