 The 14th edition (1929) of the Encyclopædia Britannica substantially enlarged the treatment given to cinema. In the new omnibus article on motion pictures, the section on directing was written by none other than the American director Cecil B. DeMille—whose The Greatest Show on Earth (1952) won an Academy Award for best picture and earned DeMille his only nomination for best director. In the following extract from that article, he argues that a good movie director or actor is, above all, a good storyteller.
The element of acting is obviously of vital importance to the value of the photoplay, and it is an element which comes most closely under the director’s control. He not only chooses his cast with great care that each part is suited to the actor, but he has much to do with the actor’s performance. He controls his actors as the conductor controls the instruments of his orchestra. His function is not to teach acting any more than the conductor’s is to teach his musicians how to play their instruments. But he must co-ordinate character conceptions so that each may stand in relation to the other as the story’s true development demands. There is constant temptation to let an interesting character become too important for the proper story value of the moment, to over-emphasize a part in its relation to the whole. Careful contrasting of types, balancing a cast, harmonizing and moulding the conception of his characters until each is perfectly adjusted to the dramatic mechanism of which it is a part, are among his most delicate and most important duties. In his relation to the actor, the director must study the individual personality and method of each player and, if he is wise, he fits the part to the actor as much as he fits the actor to the part; he must, to some extent, vary his method to suit the need of each actor, if he is to attain the greatest result of which the actor is capable.
In general, the director faces this problem: to perfect each moment of the story separately and then to combine these bits into a smoothly flowing drama in which every moment will bear its proper relation to every other moment. In this connection, the question of tempo becomes most important, for the crescendo and diminuendo of drama are partly achieved through the varying tempi of successive scenes. Here again, the analogy of the motion picture to the symphony is close. But the director is powerless to control the speed at which the picture is projected in the theatre, and his carefully done work is frequently hurt by being run so fast as to lose all semblance of human life.
As the picture progresses it is assembled in a rough cut which corresponds to the first draft of a play. Every scene and incident is in this first assembly, which almost invariably runs from twice to four times the length of the finished product. But in studying this rough assembly the director gets the “feel” of his picture; he senses its length and tempo and, frequently, changes his idea of its relative values. He guides himself accordingly in that part of the picture still to be made; he sees that certain incidents are less effective in their context than they felt when they were being made; that others are capable of further development than the first outline indicated; and so, sometimes groping his way, sometimes with true inspirational vision he finishes the “shooting” of the picture.
Then follows the task of editing the film; of reducing 30 reels to ten; of seeing the picture for the first time concretely, as a whole; of studying the new values which inevitably appear and, frequently, of compensating for values which seem to have disappeared. In the process of shortening the film captions must be rewritten, some left out as unnecessary, others put in where action has been so changed in the cutting that it is not sufficiently clear in pantomime alone. The importance of the cutting-room can hardly be overstated; it is here that the director selects and proportions the elements of his picture until its final form is achieved.
In the last analysis the director is a story-teller. His must be the art of combining the arts of others into one creation, and he must balance the values contributed by those other arts so that none of them is out of proportion to the true symmetry of the whole. He may not have conceived the story first, but he has to make it part of himself before he can put it on the screen; he may not have written it, but it is he who tells it; and upon the force, the clearness and the art of his telling depends the value of the work.
