Coogan’s Bluff,  American crime drama, released in 1968, that marks the first teaming of Clint Eastwood and director Don Siegel, who later collaborated on the popular Dirty Harry movies.
Deputy Sheriff Walt Coogan (played by Eastwood) is a tough lawman from Arizona who travels to New York City to extradite an escaped killer, James Ringerman (Don Stroud). Ringerman, however, is in the hospital after overdosing on LSD. Coogan grows increasingly frustrated at the legal technicalities hindering Ringerman’s release and soon takes matters into his own hands. He tricks the hospital into releasing Ringerman into his custody, but plans go awry when the killer’s girlfriend arranges for Coogan to be beaten. Ringerman escapes with a gun stolen from Coogan, leading to further chases—on motorcycles and on foot—and additional fights, including a vicious confrontation in a pool hall, before the fugitive is finally apprehended.
The first teaming of Eastwood and Siegel had a rocky start. Eastwood was told director Alex Segal would be at the helm and was reluctant to work with the “other Siegel.” The script underwent numerous rewrites, and the director and star argued frequently before developing a long-term friendship. The resulting film is a classic of action filmmaking, tightly edited in the famed Siegel style with no wasted frames. (Siegel’s methods greatly influenced Eastwood’s own style of directing years later.) The fight scene in the pool hall—a finely choreographed sequence involving pool balls and cue sticks—earned particular acclaim. The role of Coogan foreshadowed the no-nonsense, tough cop that Eastwood would later play in the Siegel-directed Dirty Harry films. Coogan’s Bluff boasts witty dialogue and a notable score by Lalo Schifrin, who composed the famous theme song to the television series Mission: Impossible (1966–73) as well as the later scores for the Dirty Harry films. Lee J. Cobb, who played a crusty New York City police lieutenant, earned particular praise for his performance. The film inspired the hit TV series McCloud (1970–77), starring Dennis Weaver.
