Darth Vader,  film character, lead villain of the popular American science fiction franchise Star Wars.
First seen in the movie Star Wars (1977; later retitled Star Wars: Episode IV—A New Hope), the towering, black-clad Darth Vader is a menacing villain. His head is covered by a mechanical helmet, and the sound of his breathing is an eerie, mechanical hiss. Armed with a deadly light sabre, telekinetic abilities, and keen intelligence, Vader leads the army of the Empire in a ruthless campaign against the heroic Rebel Alliance. In an intriguing twist offered in The Empire Strikes Back (1980; Star Wars: Episode V—The Empire Strikes Back), Vader is revealed to be the father of the young rebel Luke Skywalker, and at the climax of the next film, Return of the Jedi (1983; Star Wars: Episode VI—Return of the Jedi), Vader turns against the Empire to save his son’s life, sacrificing his own in the process.
A later trilogy of prequel films chronicles Vader’s origin as a young slave boy named Anakin Skywalker, who is liberated and trained by the galaxy’s guardians of peace and justice, the Jedi Knights. Skywalker comes of age in a period of increasing political turmoil. The known world, led by the Galactic Republic at the beginning of the trilogy, has by the end devolved into a tyranny run by the Sith, a league of evildoers who fight against the Jedi.
Skywalker’s life follows a pattern common to heroic folklore, in which love and honour are first lost and later redeemed. Despite Jedi prohibitions, he falls in love with and marries a young woman, Padmé (Naberrie) Amidala. Susceptible to his own hubris, fearful that Amidala’s pregnancy will end in tragedy, and easily manipulated by a powerful father figure (who is in truth a Sith), Skywalker succumbs to the dark side. He becomes the Sith lord Darth Vader, betraying and all but annihilating the Jedi. Maimed in a battle with his former Jedi mentor, he is thereafter able to live only with the assistance of a mechanical suit.
Star Wars creator George Lucas conceived Vader’s character, with designer Ralph McQuarrie contributing some of his most iconic visual elements. He was performed physically by bodybuilder David Prowse, his voice was provided by actor James Earl Jones, and his face in Episode VI was that of actor Sebastian Shaw. In the prequel trilogy, Hayden Christensen portrayed Anakin Skywalker at the time of his transformation. 
