Dead Ringers,  Canadian film, a psychological thriller about twin gynecologists who gradually descend into madness, that is considered one of director David Cronenberg’s best films. Regarded by many as one of the best horror movies ever made, it won 10 Genie Awards from the Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television—including best picture, director, lead actor, and adapted screenplay—and was named one of the Top 10 Canadian films of all time in polls conducted by the Toronto International Film Festival in 2004 and 2015.
The premise of Dead Ringers is derived from Bari Wood and Jack Geasland’s 1977 novel, Twins, a fictionalized account of the true story of Stewart and Cyril Marcus, twin-brother gynecologists and barbiturate addicts who were found dead in their Manhattan apartment in 1975. The film adaptation began in 1981; several screenwriters and producers were involved in the project before Cronenberg came onboard.
Jeremy Irons plays twins Elliot and Beverly Mantle, brilliant gynecologists who specialize in fertility and are so unusually close that they routinely pretend to be each other. After they are visited by Claire Niveau (Geneviève Bujold), a famous actress with a deformed uterus, Elliot pretends to be Beverly and seduces Claire. She ends up falling for Beverly, beginning a kinky love affair with him and sharing not only her body but also her drug habit. The drugs release the madness that has always been inside the twins, and, although Elliot tries to cover for Beverly, the situation rapidly spirals into drug addiction, insanity, and death.
Brilliant yet emotionally cold, Dead Ringers asks disturbing questions about the nature of individual identity and explores such themes as eroticism, narcissism, misogyny, and masculine-feminine dichotomies. Although restrained by Cronenberg standards, the film contains several vivid set pieces. One particularly lurid touch is the Mantle clinic’s operating theatre, where the doctors and nurses wear blood-red surgical masks and gowns. Beverly designs and commissions a range of special gynecological instruments for treating “mutant” women. Laid out on a trolley, his twisted creations are the stuff of nightmares.
Cronenberg is a master of special effects. Traditionally, when an actor plays two different characters who appear on-screen at the same time, the screen is invisibly split into two halves. When the characters talk to each other, the scene seems static or staged. In Dead Ringers, Cronenberg uses “moving splits,” employing computer technology to move the position of the split and the camera at the same time, thus allowing him to travel with his camera as the characters walk and talk together. The result is that Irons’s twins convincingly appear as two separate people rather than the result of trick photography.
Cronenberg’s first film after the critically acclaimed hit The Fly (1986), Dead Ringers performed modestly at the box office but was generally very well received by critics. Janet Maslin of the New York Times called the film “a startling tale of physical and psychic disintegration, pivoting on the twins’ hopeless interdependence and playing havoc with the viewer’s grip on reality. It’s a mesmerizing achievement, as well as a terrifically unnerving one.” The Washington Post’s Desson Howe said, “Watching ‘Ringers’ is not unlike watching a critical operation—unnerving but also enthralling.”
The original version of this entry was published by 
The Canadian Encyclopedia
.
