Doctor Zhivago,  American dramatic film, released in 1965, that was a sprawling adaptation of Boris Pasternak’s acclaimed novel. Although the movie earned mixed reviews, it became one of the top box-office attractions of all time.
World War I and the Russian Revolution of 1917 form the backdrop for the love story between physician and poet Yury Zhivago (played by Omar Sharif) and Lara (Julie Christie). They first meet when Lara’s mother attempts suicide after discovering that her lover, the powerful government official Komarovsky (Rod Steiger), is having an affair with Lara. Zhivago is called to tend to the dying woman. The two later cross paths at a party, where Lara tries unsuccessfully to kill Komarovsky. She later marries the young revolutionary Pasha (Tom Courtenay), who eventually abandons her. With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Zhivago, who is now also married, goes to the front lines to assist wounded soldiers. There he once again sees Lara, who is serving as a nurse. The two develop a close but chaste relationship. When Zhivago returns to Moscow, he finds that the revolution has brought cataclysmic changes. He later reunites with Lara, and they finally consummate their love affair. Zhivago is subsequently taken by communist rebels who need his medical skills, and he serves them for several years before deserting. After returning home, he discovers that his wife and children have fled to France. He then finds Lara, and the couple resume their affair; during this time Zhivago writes a number of poems dedicated to her. However, Komarovsky soon arrives to inform the couple that they are being watched by authorities. He arranges for them to leave the country, but at the last moment, Zhivago refuses to go, preferring to stay in his homeland. Lara—who, unbeknownst to Zhivago, is pregnant—flees with Komarovsky. Many years later Zhivago sees Lara walking down a street in Moscow. Before he can reach her, however, he drops dead of a heart attack. Although the two lovers were not destined to be reunited, their relationship lives on through their daughter, whom Zhivago never met.
Doctor Zhivago was a crowd-pleaser from the moment it premiered; when adjusted for ticket-price inflation, its box-office receipts make it one of cinema’s highest-grossing films. Directed by David Lean, it exhibited the grand scale, lush cinematography, and breathtaking landscapes that were hallmarks of his work. The film was also notable for its strong supporting cast and Maurice Jarre’s classic score. However, Doctor Zhivago was a flawed production in many ways. The script was too ambitious in its attempt to combine the sweep of the Russian Revolution with the lives of the story’s protagonists. Sharif’s Zhivago is arguably another misstep, with some finding the portrayal lacking intensity and passion. Producer Carlo Ponti originally envisioned filming in the Soviet Union but was denied permission—not surprisingly, as the novel was banned in the country until 1987.
