Dr. No,  British spy film, released in 1962, that is the first installment in the James Bond series, one of the most successful franchises in cinema. The movie is based on Ian Fleming’s best-selling novel.
Bond, a British MI6 agent (played by Sean Connery), is sent by his boss, M (Bernard Lee), to Jamaica after a fellow agent is murdered while looking into the activities of a mysterious man named Dr. No (Joseph Wiseman), who owns a bauxite mine off the island’s coast. After arriving in Kingston, Bond meets CIA agent Felix Leiter (Jack Lord), who, with the help of local boatman Quarrel (John Kitzmiller), has been investigating Dr. No. After several attempts on Bond’s life, he and Quarrel make their way to the island of Crab Key, which is privately owned by Dr. No. There, Bond encounters a free-spirited young woman named Honey Ryder (Ursula Andress). The trio encounters Dr. No’s much-feared fire-breathing “dragon,” which turns out to be a tank equipped with a flamethrower. Quarrel is killed by the device, and Bond and Ryder are captured and taken to Dr. No’s underground lair.
Over dinner, Dr. No attempts to induce Bond to join him in the international crime organization SPECTRE. Dr. No also reveals his plan to destroy U.S. space vehicles by using his bauxite-mine facility as a cover for the transmission of radio waves that sabotage the launches. When Bond refuses to join SPECTRE, he is tortured and imprisoned. After escaping from his cell, Bond makes his way to Dr. No’s control room just in time to thwart the impending destruction of another space vehicle. He battles with Dr. No, who is killed after falling into a vat of radioactive water. Bond then rescues Ryder, commandeers a boat, and escapes from the mine just before it erupts in a massive explosion.
Dr. No was a huge commercial success and proved highly influential in the action-film genre. Of particular note was Peter Hunt’s fast-paced editing and the movie’s cynical humour, played with a straight face by Connery. Ken Adam’s ingenious production designs set the mold for subsequent Bond films: larger-than-life sets in exotic locations. The emergence of Andress from the surf in a white bikini remains an iconic screen image. Although it was the first Bond film, Dr. No was based on the sixth book in Fleming’s series.
