Driving Miss Daisy,  American film, released in 1989, that was adapted by Alfred Uhry from his play of the same name and that starred Morgan Freeman and Jessica Tandy. The movie won four Academy Awards, including that for best picture, as well as three Golden Globe Awards, including that for best comedy or musical.
The film, set in Atlanta, begins in 1948. Daisy Werthan (played by Tandy), an elderly Jewish widow, accidentally backs her car over a hedge and into her neighbor’s yard, wrecking the vehicle. Her son, Boolie (Dan Aykroyd), tries without success to convince her that she cannot drive anymore. Nonetheless, he hires an African American man in his 60s, Hoke Colburn (Freeman), to act as her chauffeur. Miss Daisy initially wants nothing to do with Hoke and forbids him to speak to her housekeeper, Idella (Esther Rolle). After several days, Miss Daisy decides to take the trolley to the grocery store. As she walks, Hoke drives along next to her, and eventually she agrees to get in the car and let him drive her.  When she finds that Hoke has eaten a can of salmon, she wants Boolie to fire him, but when Hoke arrives for work, he brings a can of salmon to replace what he ate, and she is mollified. Their relationship develops gradually over many years. In 1951 Hoke tells Miss Daisy that he never learned to read, and Miss Daisy, a former schoolteacher, begins teaching him that skill. In 1955, when Boolie buys a new car for his mother, Hoke purchases her old car for himself. Hoke drives Miss Daisy to Mobile, Alabama, so that she can attend her brother’s 90th birthday party. During the trip, they are accosted by racist police officers while they are having a picnic lunch, but they are allowed to continue the trip. During the party, Hoke watches the celebration from the kitchen with the maid.
In 1963 Hoke negotiates a raise in the salary that Boolie pays him. Idella suffers a fatal heart attack while shelling peas in Miss Daisy’s kitchen. After that, Hoke begins also helping Miss Daisy with cooking and gardening. When a winter storm knocks out the electricity in Miss Daisy’s home, Hoke brings her doughnuts and makes a fire for her. In about 1966, the temple that Miss Daisy attends is bombed, and Hoke tells her that the same sort of people who lynched a friend’s father when he was a boy had committed the bombing. Miss Daisy fails to see the connection. Later, as Hoke is driving Miss Daisy to a dinner at which Martin Luther King, Jr., is to speak, she offers her second ticket to him, but he is put off by the fact that she offered the ticket only at the last minute, and he chooses to listen to the speech on the car radio. One day in 1971 Hoke arrives to find that Miss Daisy is upset and confused, thinking that she is a schoolteacher. He calls Boolie and tries to calm her down. Miss Daisy tells Hoke that he is her best friend. In the final scene, in 1973, Hoke visits Miss Daisy in the nursing home.
Uhry’s play Driving Miss Daisy was inspired by the relationship between his grandmother, Lena Fox, and her longtime chauffeur, Will Coleman. The play opened Off-Broadway in 1987, with Freeman playing the chauffeur, and it earned a Pulitzer Prize in 1988. The movie, directed by Bruce Beresford, was the only film adapted from an Off-Broadway play to have won the Oscar for best picture.
