Fantasia,  American animated film, released in 1940, that was produced by Walt Disney and features seven unrelated segments set to classical music under the direction of famed conductor Leopold Stokowski. Viewers and critics have deemed the film, which lacks an overarching narrative, both bewildering and impressive.
Several of the sequences are widely considered to be too slow in pace, while others, such as the dramatic rendering of a witches’ sabbath set to Modest Mussorgsky’s “Night on Bald Mountain,” are praised for their mesmerizing intensity. Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky’s “The Nutcracker Suite” is danced  by fantastical corps of fish, fairies, and flora, while another segment, set to Amilcare Ponchielli’s “Dance of the Hours,” features a cast of animals, including hippos and elephants. The film’s most famous segment, “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice,” places Mickey Mouse in the title role and is scored with a piece by French composer Paul Dukas. Its famous central image, of an implacable army of enchanted brooms, is one of the most indelible in animated film.
Fantasia’s animation is widely acclaimed, but audiences and critics have long debated the merits of each segment. For an animated film, it is a dubious choice for younger audiences, even with the appearance of Mickey Mouse. Disney intended to update the film annually with new segments, but its initial box-office failure precluded this from happening. The checkered history of the movie includes releases of various lengths and the controversial editing of racially insensitive animated characters. Ironically, the film became profitable in the late 1960s when it was adopted by the counterculture on the strength of its trippy imagery. Fantasia was rereleased in 1999 as Fantasia 2000. It was enhanced with seven new sequences that were set to such classical pieces as George Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue” and Igor Stravinsky’s “The Firebird Suite.” Fantasia 2000 was the first animated feature to be released as an IMAX film.
