Fort Apache,  American western film, released in 1948, that was the first, and widely considered the best, of director John Ford’s “cavalry trilogy.” Inspired by the Battle of the Little Bighorn (1876), the film was unique for its time in portraying Native Americans sympathetically as victims of the U.S. government.
Lieut. Col. Owen Thursday (played by Henry Fonda and modeled on George Armstrong Custer) is ordered to take command at Fort Apache, a remote military outpost located in Apache territory in Arizona. The widowed Thursday is accompanied by his teenaged daughter, Philadelphia (Shirley Temple). Upon his arrival, Thursday’s strict uncompromising methods alienate the soldiers. Thursday has an especially thorny relationship with his second-in-command, Capt. Kirby York (John Wayne), who fails to convince Thursday that his “by-the-book” style is impractical at the fort, where officers must constantly improvise their strategies. Faced with an increasingly violent Apache insurrection—which is caused in part by the actions of a corrupt U.S. government agent—Thursday authorizes York to initiate a peace treaty with the Apache chief Cochise (Miguel Inclan). However, when Thursday intentionally breaks the treaty, Cochise launches a major attack. Ignoring York’s strategy suggestions, Thursday leads an ill-advised charge in which he and many of his men are killed. Although it is clear to York that Thursday’s arrogance and unbending nature caused the massacre, the U.S. government proclaims Thursday to be a martyr and a role model for other army officers.
Despite Wayne’s star power, Fort Apache was Fonda’s film. He gave a strong performance as the stubborn Thursday, imbuing the flawed character with a degree of humanity. A critical and commercial success, Fort Apache offered plenty of entertainment—the action sequences are especially notable—while at the same time raising questions about heroism and legends. The other films in Ford’s calvary trilogy are She Wore a Yellow Ribbon (1949) and Rio Grande (1950).
