From Russia with Love,  British spy film, released in 1963, that was the second in the James Bond franchise. With notable performances by Lotte Lenya and Robert Shaw, it is considered one of the best Bond movies, and it stays relatively faithful to Ian Fleming’s novel.
Bond (played by Sean Connery) is assigned to walk into what may be a death trap. British intelligence has been contacted by Tatiana Romanova (Daniela Bianchi), a young Soviet cipher clerk with access to a highly desirable decoding machine called the Lektor. Romanova tells MI6 that she is willing to help Bond secure the Lektor in return for safe passage to England. Bond and his boss M (Bernard Lee) do not believe her story, but M cannot pass up the chance to get a Lektor. Bond arrives in Istanbul, where he meets the local station chief, Kerim Bey (Pedro Armendáriz), a charismatic man with seemingly endless connections to people in the espionage world. Bond continues to work with Romanova, unaware that she is being used as a pawn by the secret criminal organization SPECTRE, where her superior in Soviet intelligence, Rosa Klebb (Lotte Lenya), holds a position of authority. Klebb has recruited a psychopathic killer named Red Grant (Robert Shaw) as part of the plot to use the Lektor and Romanova to lure Bond to a humiliating and scandalous death as revenge for killing SPECTRE operative Dr. No.
Tatiana and Bond succeed in stealing the Lektor from the Soviet embassy and, along with Bey, board the Orient-Express. Grant, posing as a British agent he has assassinated, is already on the train. He murders Bey and convinces Bond that he is the contact who is arranging his escape to England with the Lektor. After overpowering Bond, Grant unveils the details of the scheme to kill him. Bond uses an exploding attaché case to gain the advantage on Grant and, in hand-to-hand battle, manages to strangle him. Romanova convinces Bond that she had no idea of the actual plot, though she admits she thought she was acting under orders for the KGB. Bond and Romanova leave the Orient-Express, hijack a speedboat, are confronted by a SPECTRE fleet (which Bond manages to destroy), and arrive in Venice, but their safety is threatened by the arrival of Klebb, who almost succeeds in assassinating Bond before she is shot dead by Romanova, who clearly has fallen in love with Bond.
The second James Bond film has many noteworthy elements, among them the performance by Armendáriz (who was terminally ill during production) and Desmond Llewelyn’s first appearance as the gadget master Q.
