Goldfinger,  British spy film, released in 1964, that made James Bond an international icon of action cinema. Like the rest of the Bond film franchise, it is based on the works of author Ian Fleming.
Bond (played by Sean Connery) is assigned to track the activities of millionaire Auric Goldfinger (Gert Fröbe), who is using his legitimate interests in smelting to illegally transport gold internationally. Bond traces the industrialist to his Swiss smelting plant, where he discovers that Goldfinger has been melting gold and having it placed as parts of the décor of a vintage automobile, which serves as his method of smuggling. Bond also finds him in collusion with Chinese agents on a major secret plan referred to as Operation Grand Slam. Bond ends up being captured by Goldfinger and threatened with dissection by laser beam. He bluffs that he knows the meaning of Operation Grand Slam, and Goldfinger spares his life.
As he is being transported to Goldfinger’s Kentucky stud farm, Bond meets Pussy Galore (Honor Blackman), who oversees female stunt pilots in the millionaire’s employ. While imprisoned at the farm, Bond breaks out of his cell and overhears Goldfinger briefing a group of Mafia leaders about the true meaning of Operation Grand Slam: he intends to have Galore’s pilots spray a lethal nerve gas over Fort Knox and then irradiate the complex with an atomic bomb supplied by the Chinese. The amount of gold on the world market will be reduced, and Goldfinger’s personal stockpile will thus skyrocket in value. After the briefing, Goldfinger tests the gas by assassinating the mob bosses. Bond is recaptured and later awakens at Fort Knox, clad in a gas mask as the nerve gas seemingly kills off the U.S. Army troops in the surrounding areas. Before Goldfinger can escape, however, the U.S. troops attack, having been only faking incapacitation. As the battle rages, Bond frees himself and manages to electrocute Goldfinger’s henchman Oddjob (Harold Sakata) after a vicious hand-to-hand battle. The bomb is stopped seconds before detonation.
In the aftermath, Bond learns that Galore, whom he had previously seduced, had notified Washington about Goldfinger’s plot and then substituted a harmless substance in the nerve-gas canisters. Aboard a plane en route to the White House to be honoured by the president, Bond is startled to find that Goldfinger has hijacked the plane and is taking it to Cuba with Galore aboard as a captive. Bond distracts Goldfinger, and the two men engage in a brief struggle. A pistol shot shatters the window and decompresses the cabin, sucking Goldfinger out of the plane to his death. Bond and Galore barely survive by parachuting to safety.
Goldfinger boasts two of the most memorable villains in movie history, with Fröbe as the jovial but evil Goldfinger and Sakata as his mute manservant Oddjob, who has a penchant for using a lethal bowler hat to decapitate his targets. German actor Fröbe learned to mouth his lines phonetically, and he was dubbed in the final cut by British actor Michael Collins. The film introduced another Bond “star”: the Aston Martin DB5, a sports car that became a mainstay in the series. Goldfinger was also notable for being the first Bond film to win an Academy Award (for sound effects).
