Grand Illusion, French La Grande Illusion,  French war film, released in 1937, that was directed by Jean Renoir. Elegant, humane, and affecting, it has been recognized as a profound statement against war and is often ranked among the greatest films ever made.
During World War I, a French plane piloted by two officers—a wealthy aristocrat, Captain de Boeldieu (played by Pierre Fresnay), and a working-class mechanic, Lieutenant Maréchal (Jean Gabin)—is shot down by a German pilot, Captain von Rauffenstein (Erich von Stroheim). Upon learning that the surviving Frenchmen are fellow officers, von Rauffenstein, also an aristocrat, invites them to lunch before they are transported to a prisoner-of-war camp. He is especially cordial to de Boeldieu, with whom, he learns, he shares friends. Transcending national boundaries even during wartime, the two enjoy a mutual respect based on social rank; they have more in common with each other than with the lower classes of their own countries.
Despite the favourable treatment accorded them, de Boeldieu and Maréchal, along with fellow captive Lieutenant Rosenthal (Marcel Dalio), plot to escape from the camp and, later, from the fortress prison to which they are transferred. At the prison, de Boeldieu agrees to distract the German guards so that Maréchal and Rosenthal can flee. After de Boeldieu sets the plan in motion by playing a flute atop a tower, von Rauffenstein pleads with him to surrender and then reluctantly shoots him. Though intended to cause only a wound, the shot proves fatal. Before he dies, de Boeldieu expresses his pity for von Rauffenstein, who will have to witness the decline of the European aristocracy and find a purpose and a role in the new order to come. Meanwhile, Maréchal and Rosenthal find refuge with a German widow (Dita Parlo), who shelters them on her farm and with whom Maréchal falls in love, before finally escaping across the border into Switzerland.
With Grand Illusion, Renoir provides a multilayered perspective on class, war, nationalism, and prejudice. For example, the film’s treatment of Rosenthal—an affluent Jewish banker who generously shares his food with his fellow inmates— has been interpreted as an effort by Renoir to combat anti-Semitism during the rise of Nazi Germany. De Boeldieu’s sacrifice for his working-class comrades, furthermore, symbolically mirrors the changing social order of Europe. In addition, Rosenthal points out the ultimate “grand illusion”: that the current war will end all wars. The performances by Jean Gabin and Erich von Stroheim are exceptional, although the latter, having spent years away from his native Austria, reportedly struggled to speak German. Grand Illusion was the first non-English-language film to be nominated for an Academy Award as best picture. However, the work was so despised by the Nazis that they confiscated and destroyed prints of the film during their World War II occupation of France.
