Greed,  American silent film drama, released in 1924, that was director Erich von Stroheim’s big-budget masterpiece. Hours were cut from the film and are presumed lost forever.
Greed is an adaptation of Frank Norris’s novel McTeague (1899). Trina (played by Zasu Pitts) is a simple woman who wins a $5,000 lottery and then finds herself caught in a love triangle characterized by greed and jealousy with her husband, McTeague (Gibson Gowland), and her former lover, Marcus (Jean Hersholt). The plot is an old standard: money not only cannot buy happiness but also can bring misery. However, the final image of a murder gone wrong in the sands of Death Valley, California, resonates with ironic consequences.
The intrigue and drama behind the scenes of Greed rival anything seen on-screen. The film was shot entirely on location in the streets and rooming houses of San Francisco, in Death Valley, and in the California hills. Stroheim delivered an initial cut that ran over eight hours. Realizing that the film was too long to be exhibited, he cut almost half the footage. The film was still deemed too long, so Stroheim, with the help of director Rex Ingram, edited it down into a four-hour version that could be shown in two parts. By that time, however, Goldwyn Pictures had merged with Metro Pictures and Louis B. Mayer Pictures to become Metro-Goldwyn Pictures (later Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer [MGM]). The head of Metro-Goldwyn, Irving Thalberg, who at Universal Pictures had fought with Stroheim over the length of Foolish Wives (1922), cut Greed to 140 minutes, over the director’s strenuous objections. Despite the cuts, the film retained much of its power, because Stroheim had concentrated the meaning of each scene in carefully constructed detail rather than by the juxtaposition of scenes. The missing reels of footage from the original cut are among the most sought-after rarities in film history but are believed to be lost forever. In 1999 a partially restored version of the film utilizing stills from the missing scenes was unveiled.
