High Noon,  American western film, released in 1952, that is widely considered a classic of the “adult” western genre, noted for its complex exploration of morality, integrity, and duty. As the reluctant hero, Gary Cooper earned an Academy Award.
Marshal Will Kane (played by Cooper) has just married and is about to retire and leave the western town of Hadleyville to start a new life with his Quaker wife, Amy (Grace Kelly). However, news arrives that revenge-seeking Frank Miller (Ian MacDonald), whom Kane arrested years earlier, is en route with a band of outlaws. Kane initially leaves but quickly returns out of a sense of duty. When he finds the townsmen too cowardly to back him and defend their community, he decides to face the gang alone. His pacifist wife eventually backs his decision but is taken hostage by Miller, forcing a showdown with her husband. After Amy distracts Miller, Kane fatally shoots the outlaw. When the townsfolk come out of hiding, Kane throws down his badge in disgust and then leaves with Amy.
High Noon was produced at the height of the Cold War, when the anticommunist Red Scare hysteria fanned by Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy was particularly strong. Some saw the film as an allegory about Hollywood’s failure to stand up to the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and as a questioning of civic responsibility. (Ironically, screenwriter Carl Foreman was later blacklisted for refusing to cooperate with HUAC.) Others believed that the movie was a testament to law and order. Among those who were critical of it was Cooper’s good friend John Wayne, who called the film un-American. He and director Howard Hawks went on to make Rio Bravo (1959) as a response to High Noon.
The part of Will Kane was originally offered to Gregory Peck, who turned it down because he thought it was too similar to his role in The Gunfighter (1950). Cooper instead was cast as the weary, disillusioned lawman, and he turned in arguably the finest performance of his career. High Noon was Kelly’s second feature film, and it elevated her to stardom. The movie is presented in nearly real time, with close-ups of the clock adding suspense as it ticks toward the noon showdown. The title song, which was sung by Tex Ritter (“High Noon [Do Not Forsake Me, Oh My Darlin’]”), became a classic.
