Horror of Dracula, original title Dracula,  British horror film, released in 1958, that was the first in a series of Dracula films produced by Hammer Films studio in England. A box-office hit, it helped establish Hammer as the successor to the American studio Universal as the leading producer of popular horror cinema.
In this version of the Dracula tale, based on the novel by Bram Stoker, Englishman Jonathan Harker (played by John Van Eyssen) poses as a librarian and takes employment with the elegant and seductive yet lethal Count Dracula (Christopher Lee), ostensibly to record his vast book collection but in reality to kill the vampire. However, Harker falls victim to the Count. Harker’s fellow vampire hunter, Dr. Van Helsing (Peter Cushing), comes searching for him but finds the castle deserted. Upon further inspection, he discovers Harker lying in a coffin, transformed into a vampire, and kills him. Van Helsing delivers the news to Arthur Holmwood (Michael Gough), brother to Harker’s fiancée, Lucy (Carol Marsh), who has taken ill. It is later discovered that Lucy has also been bitten by Dracula. After the Count absconds with Arthur’s wife, Arthur and Van Helsing give chase, leading to a final showdown. Dracula crumbles to dust as Van Helsing forces him into the sunlight with two candlesticks positioned to form a cross.
Originally released in England as Dracula, the film was retitled for distribution in the United States to prevent confusion with Tod Browning’s classic Dracula (1931) starring Bela Lugosi. Lee’s interpretation of the Count is both charismatic and terrifying, and his screen presence is so strong that the viewer barely notices how infrequently the actor actually appears on-screen. The film is a classic Hammer production, displaying the hallmark of the studio’s approach to horror films: rich production design and impressive cinematography that belie the relatively low budget of the production, and a liberal amount of gore and sexual titillation to capture the attention of viewer and censor alike.
