How the West Was Won,  American western film, released in 1962, that was a sprawling epic about the transformation of the American West in the 19th century.
The story is told in five parts—“The Rivers,” “The Plains,” “The Civil War,” “The Railroad,” and “The Outlaws”—that follow several generations of the Prescott family as they face numerous challenges in the untamed West. The saga opens with them heading west to lay claim for a homestead. While attempting to navigate a river, they encounter treacherous rapids, and the mother and the father (Agnes Moorhead and Karl Malden, respectively) are killed. Their teenage daughters Eve (Carroll Baker) and Lilith (Debbie Reynolds), however, survive. Eve marries fur trapper Linus Rawlings (James Stewart) and settles down to fulfill her parents’ quest to have a farm. Lilith becomes a popular entertainer in saloons and on riverboats and eventually heads to California. During the difficult journey, she falls in love with Cleve Van Valen (Gregory Peck), a charismatic opportunist. They marry and move to San Francisco. The story then concentrates on Eve’s son Zeb (George Peppard), who survives the Civil War only to learn that his mother has passed away; his father had died earlier in the fighting. He leaves the farm to his younger brother and joins the U.S. Cavalry. While protecting railroad-construction workers, he befriends Jethro Stuart (Henry Fonda), a buffalo hunter. After a tragic confrontation with Native Americans, Zeb leaves and becomes a marshal in Arizona. He later confronts an old nemesis, outlaw Charlie Gant (Eli Wallach), and learns that he is planning to rob a train. In a shoot-out, Zeb succeeds in foiling Gant, but not before the train crashes and is destroyed. Zeb and his family are thus freed to resume their lives.
How the West Was Won was a triumph on numerous levels. Although three directors—Henry Hathaway, John Ford, and George Marshall—collaborated on the film, the story is told seamlessly, backed by the solid performances of its cast. Filmed in Cinerama, the movie featured stunning visuals accompanied by Alfred Newman’s thundering score. Spencer Tracy narrated the film.
