IMDb, in full Internet Movie Database,  Web site that provides information about millions of films and television programs as well as their cast and crew. The name is an acronym for Internet Movie Database. As a wholly owned subsidiary of Amazon.com, IMDb is based in Seattle, but the office of Col Needham, the founder and CEO, remains in Bristol, England, where the Web site was founded.
Needham, an English software engineer and film buff, began what became IMDb with a list of all the films he had seen since 1980. The stated founding date of IMDb is October 17, 1990, when Needham posted his movie-listing software to a USENET film discussion group. The site was cooperatively expanded and became an early migrant to the World Wide Web. IMDb.com was incorporated in January 1996 and was purchased by Amazon.com two years later. Amazon, an online bookseller then in the process of expanding its product line, intended to use IMDb as a platform for sales of videotapes and DVDs. (In the 21st century many films became electronically accessible directly from the IMDb site through Amazon Video.) But even after becoming an Amazon subsidiary, IMDb retained its identity and considerable autonomy. Needham stayed on as chief executive.
The IMDb site grew beyond its original purpose of indexing credits in film and TV productions. An entry for a film may now cover studios and other companies associated with the film, release dates in various countries, censor classifications, box-office grosses, awards won, and other information. The entries for performers, directors, writers, and others involved in film and TV productions are also comprehensive. Some entries include photos, videos, and coming-attraction trailers.
There is no charge to search the IMDb site. Users who want to rate or review movies or contribute data must sign up for an IMDb account, but this step is also free of charge. In 2002 the company started IMDbPro as a fee-based service for industry professionals. IMDbPro has features that allow actors and other workers to post their resumes and contact information, and producers and other executives can provide various details about their productions. In 2008 IMDb made two important acquisitions. One was Box Office Mojo, a Web site founded in 1999 that parses Hollywood box-office grosses in great detail. The other was Withoutabox, founded in 2000 as an electronic interface between film festivals in search of films and filmmakers in search of audiences. Like many other Web sites, IMDb moved into mobile applications during the 21st century.
