Judgment at Nuremberg,  American dramatic film, released in 1961, that was based on the post-World War II Nuremberg trials of former Nazi leaders. The film explores the complicity of the German people in the crimes committed by the state, including the atrocities of the Holocaust.
The plot centres on the military trial of four German judges accused of crimes against humanity for having carried out Nazi law. American prosecutor Col. Tad Lawson (played by Richard Widmark) argues that the defendants should be held fully responsible for their actions and offers as a witness a man (Montgomery Clift) who was castrated for mental deficiency. Defense attorney Hans Rolfe (Maximilian Schell) counters that the judges were merely obedient to Adolf Hitler’s orders and therefore no different from any other law-abiding German. Meanwhile, to gain perspective on the postwar German mood, the trial’s presiding judge, Dan Haywood (Spencer Tracy), meets with Madame Bertholt (Marlene Dietrich), the widow of a German general, outside the courtroom. The trial reaches a dramatic climax during an investigation into the role of defendant Ernst Janning (Burt Lancaster) in a case he had presided over in which a Jewish man was executed for allegedly having an affair with a non-Jewish woman. After Rolfe aggressively interrogates the woman (Judy Garland), Janning takes the stand and admits his culpability. Although Haywood is advised to be lenient so as not to flare tempers in the wake of the recently enacted Berlin blockade, he ultimately sentences the defendants to life imprisonment.
The big-budget production was shot in Germany, and, in a bold move for a Hollywood feature of its era, original footage of the death camps as encountered by Allied troops at the end of the war was interjected into the film. Despite a highly publicized premiere in Berlin, Judgment at Nuremberg proved controversial in Germany, as many took offense at having their still-recent past dissected on the big screen. In the United States, however, the film received critical acclaim and became a major hit. It garnered 11 Academy Award nominations, including four among its star-studded cast (and a win for Schell). Though not nominated, Lancaster earned additional praise for his portrayal of an educated aristocrat seduced by Hitler’s plan and rhetoric, a role that served as a metaphorical stand-in for the German populace at large.
