Laura,  American film noir, released in 1944, that is considered a classic of the genre. The movie, which was directed by Otto Preminger, is notable as both a suspenseful mystery and a compelling account of obsession.
Hard-boiled police detective Mark McPherson (played by Dana Andrews) is investigating the murder of a young woman who was shot in the face. The victim is believed to be a beautiful advertising executive named Laura Hunt (Gene Tierney). McPherson examines all aspects of Laura’s life, including the two men who knew her best, her mentor—the older, snobbish newspaper columnist Waldo Lydecker (Clifton Webb)—and her sophisticated fiancé, Shelby Carpenter (Vincent Price). Through their stories, which are told in flashback, through Laura’s letters, and—most of all—through a haunting portrait of her, McPherson becomes romantically obsessed with the young woman. The supposedly dead Laura shockingly appears before him in her apartment, however, and McPherson discovers the true identity of the victim and solves the mystery—the jealous Lydecker had killed a woman he mistook for Laura. Determined to murder her a “second” time, Lydecker breaks into Laura’s apartment but is shot before he can kill her. He dies professing his love for her.
Though Laura was the brainchild of Preminger, who had secured rights to the 1943 novel by Vera Caspary, 20th Century Fox mogul Darryl F. Zanuck initially approved Rouben Mamoulian to direct the film and Preminger merely to produce it. Zanuck also envisioned Laura as a B-film designed for a quick release. But when trouble developed between the cast and the director, Mamoulian was fired, and his footage was scrapped and reshot by Preminger. Although Preminger delivered a fine film, Zanuck insisted on shooting an epilogue that made the story appear to be all a dream. When influential columnist Walter Winchell saw an early screening of Laura and was critical of the ending, Preminger’s original version was restored. The theme song, “Laura,” which was adapted from the score composed by David Raskin, with words by the Academy Award-winning lyricist Johnny Mercer, became a classic in its own right. In addition, cinematographer Joseph La Shelle won an Oscar for his work.
