Lawrence of Arabia,  British historical film, released in 1962, that became one of the most celebrated epics in the history of cinema. The movie, which presents a portrait of the complicated soldier and author T.E. Lawrence, won seven Academy Awards, including those for best picture and best director, and made lead actor Peter O’Toole a star.
The film opens with the death of Lawrence (played by O’Toole) in a motorcycle accident. A reporter’s questions about Lawrence’s life and character provide a framing device for the story, which begins in about 1916 or 1917. Lawrence is a military cartographer in the World War I British army headquarters in Cairo. Mr. Dryden (Claude Rains) of the Arab Bureau assigns Lawrence to go into Arabia to assess the goals and chances of Arab statesman Prince Feisal (Alec Guinness), a leader of the Arab Revolt against the Turks, who are allied with Germany. Lawrence travels with a Bedouin guide, who drinks from a well belonging to a rival tribe led by Sherif Ali (Omar Sharif). Sherif Ali kills the guide, and Lawrence continues on his own. He then meets British Colonel Harry Brighton (Anthony Quayle). Brighton believes that the lightly armed Arabs should retreat and allow themselves to be absorbed into the British army. However, Lawrence conceives a plan to conquer the Turkish-held port of Al-ʿAqabah by approaching it from land, where it is unguarded, a feat which requires the crossing of Al-Nafūd, a desert thought to be impassable. Without Brighton’s knowledge, Lawrence sets out with 50 of Feisal’s men and Sherif Ali. After Lawrence retraces his steps to find a man who has fallen behind and rescues him, Sherif Ali rewards Lawrence’s heroism by replacing his British army uniform with Arab robes. Outside Al-ʿAqabah, Lawrence persuades Auda abu Tayi (Anthony Quinn), leader of a strong local Bedouin tribe, to join with them, and the united force succeeds in capturing the port.  Lawrence returns to Cairo to inform Dryden, Brighton, and General Allenby (Jack Hawkins) of his exploits.
Lawrence then leads his Arab allies in guerrilla warfare against the Turks, but at Darʿā he is captured by the Turkish Bey (José Ferrer) and tortured. The experience breaks Lawrence’s spirit. Lawrence relinquishes command of the Arab forces to Sherif Ali and returns to Cairo. He seeks to cease his service in Arabia, but General Allenby persuades him to lead an Arab assault on Damascus. He is given an army of mercenaries, and along the way he leads a massacre of Turkish troops in revenge for their having sacked the Arab village of Tafas. The Arabs reach Damascus before the British and conquer it, but they are too disunited to govern it, and it falls to the British. Lawrence is promoted and sent home to England.
Director David Lean was said to have spent nearly three years making Lawrence of Arabia, which is based on Lawrence’s mammoth memoir The Seven Pillars of Wisdom (1926). The movie, shot on location in Jordan, Spain, and Morocco, is famed for its ravishing desert vistas. After the film’s initial release, 35 minutes of footage was deleted; most of that footage was restored after having been discovered by Robert A. Harris and Jim Painten and was included in a widely acclaimed 1989 reissue. The writer Michael Wilson was blacklisted at the time the film was made but was later recognized as cowriter with Robert Bolt of the screenplay for Lawrence of Arabia.
