Madigan,  American crime thriller film, released in 1968, that was based on Richard Dougherty’s novel The Commissioner (1962). It was one of several successful crime films directed by Don Siegel, winning recognition for its gritty script, taut pacing, and verisimilitude.
In the film’s opening scene, New York City police detective Dan Madigan (played by Richard Widmark) and his partner, Rocco Bonaro (Harry Guardino), break into the Spanish Harlem apartment of Barney Benesch (Steve Ihnat), a murder suspect. When the detectives become distracted by his nude girlfriend, Benesch escapes with their guns. Castigated by their outraged police commissioner, Anthony Russell (Henry Fonda), the pair is given 72 hours to find Benesch. As the detectives track the fugitive, Russell faces other problems—namely, charges of racism and brutality leveled at the police department by a black minister (Raymond St. Jacques) and the revelation that police inspector Charles Kane (James Whitmore) has accepted a bribe. Additionally, both Russell and Madigan are unsettled in their personal lives, with the former embroiled in a messy affair with a mistress (Susan Clark) and the latter grappling with the effects of his job on his marriage. Eventually, after Benesch fatally shoots two police officers, Madigan and Bonaro track him to another apartment in Spanish Harlem. A standoff occurs until Madigan initiates a break-in, and both he and Benesch are killed in the ensuing shootout.
The acclaim for Madigan and its performances came in spite of myriad problems that beset film production. Siegel and producer Frank P. Rosenberg argued incessantly, while real-life gangs menaced the cast and crew, forcing a shift in shooting location from Spanish Harlem to Los Angeles. Displeased with Abraham Polonsky’s revisions to his original script, Howard Rodman removed his name from the credits, instead listing himself under the pseudonym Henri Simoun. The film later served as fodder for a short-lived TV series (1972–73) of the same name in which Widmark reprised his starring role.
