 The following biography appeared in the Britannica Book of the Year published in 1966.
Mike Nichols, Broadway’s sandy-haired boy who turns everything he touches to rollicking comedy and golden receipts, went to Hollywood in 1965 with Midas looking over his shoulder. His purpose: to take Edward Albee’s play Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? and “turn it into a movie” for a reported $250,000, the highest fee a director had ever earned for his first film. The assignment was even more notable because it put an untried moviemaker in charge of two of Hollywood’s most titanic names: Richard Burton and his wife Elizabeth Taylor. To complete his difficulties, Nichols had taken on the task of dealing with the script as a comic tragedy, a form that requires a sure, gentle touch.
Nichols demonstrated such a touch in New York, both as a performer and as a director. Three of Broadway’s most successful comedies played to full houses simultaneously, in large part because of his directorial talents. These were Neil Simon’s Barefoot in the Park, Nichols’ first effort; Luv by Murray Schisgal; and The Odd Couple, another Simon script. While these three were running on Broadway, another Nichols show, The Knack, was an off-Broadway success.
Nichols was born in Berlin on Nov. 1, 1931, the son of a Jewish doctor who had fled persecution in his native Russia. Fleeing Nazism, the family came separately to the U.S. and settled in New York City in 1939. There, Nichols’ father changed his name from Peschkowsky to the derivative of his patronymic name, Nicholas. Mike attended private schools and studied briefly at New York University and the University of Chicago before he “drifted” into acting.
In Chicago he met Elaine May, and they performed at the Compass Theatre and the Playwrights Theatre Club. Coming to New York as a comedy team, they played at the Village Vanguard and the Blue Angel, where they became established. They also appeared on radio and television, made a series of popular records, and in 1960 opened An Evening with Mike Nichols and Elaine May, a format of improvisations that ran on Broadway for more than 300 performances.
