Mutiny on the Bounty,  American epic film, released in 1962, that recounts the 1789 mutiny on the HMS Bounty. The movie, a lavish remake of the 1935 classic, became perhaps best known for its production difficulties, many of which centred on star Marlon Brando.
The story begins in Portsmouth, England, in 1787. The Bounty, under the command of Capt. William Bligh (played by Trevor Howard), sets sail on an arduous voyage to Tahiti to bring back precious supplies of breadfruit. Bligh’s second in command is Fletcher Christian (Brando), an aristocratic dilettante who immediately offends the stern Bligh with his mannerisms and levity. During the journey, Christian becomes increasingly appalled by Bligh’s disregard for, and cruel treatment of, his crew. Nevertheless, when the ship finally reaches Tahiti, even Bligh cannot keep his men from indulging in the island’s pleasures. By the time the Bounty is ready to sail back to England, the men are in a foul mood that only worsens when, facing a shortage of water, Bligh allocates most of the remaining supply to the breadfruit. After a violent confrontation with Bligh, Christian mutinies. He and his supporters take control of the ship and set Bligh and his followers adrift in a longboat. Incredibly, Bligh guides his men to safety and immediately sets out to bring the mutineers to justice. Christian and the remaining crew return to Tahiti for supplies, and they then take refuge on a remote island. However, the crew becomes alarmed by Christian’s suggestion that they return to England to stand trial. They decide to burn the Bounty, but in doing so, Christian becomes trapped in the wreck and dies on the seeming island paradise he had come to disdain.
Mutiny on the Bounty proved to be an out-of-control production, and its failure at the box office nearly bankrupted Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Much of the blame fell on Brando, whose uncooperative and difficult behaviour delayed filming and led to cost overruns. Director Lewis Milestone, with whom Brando frequently clashed, called the movie “The Mutiny of Marlon Brando.” When finally released, the film was largely dismissed by critics, who compared it unfavourably to the 1935 version starring Clark Gable and Charles Laughton. However, the 1962 movie found an appreciative audience in later years. Although Brando’s portrayal of Christian as an elitist fop was much criticized, some claim it is more daring and effective than Gable’s Americanized portrayal. In addition, Howard was compelling as Bligh, and the cinematography was as captivating as the score.
