North by Northwest,  American suspense film, released in 1959, that is one of Alfred Hitchcock’s most-entertaining movies. It was the fourth and last collaboration between the director and star Cary Grant.
Roger O. Thornhill (played by Grant) is a successful advertising executive who, while having lunch at the Plaza Hotel, is mistaken for another man and kidnapped in broad daylight. He is taken to an opulent home on the outskirts of New York City, where he meets Phillip Vandamm (James Mason), a charismatic aristocrat who believes Thornhill is George Kaplan and demands certain information. After repeatedly denying that he is Kaplan, Thornhill is forcibly intoxicated and sent off in his car, presumably to drive to his death in a fatal accident. Instead, the staggeringly drunk Thornhill is arrested by the local police. In trying to determine what has happened to him, Thornhill is led to Lester Townsend (Philip Ober), a UN diplomat. Just as Thornhill meets him, however, Townsend is murdered, leaving Thornhill as the prime suspect. He flees on a train to Chicago and avoids capture with the help of Eve Kendall (Eva Marie Saint), a vivacious blonde who not only shelters Thornhill in her cabin but also seduces him.
Upon arriving in Chicago, Kendall informs Thornhill that Kaplan will meet him at a remote rural bus stop. Once there, however, Thornhill discovers that he has been lured into a trap and barely avoids being killed by a crop duster. He returns to Chicago and trails Kendall to an auction house, where he discovers that she is Vandamm’s mistress. In a tense confrontation, Thornhill is arrested by police but is then taken to the airport, where he is met by the Professor (Leo G. Carroll), a U.S. intelligence official who informs Thornhill that Kendall is actually an agent working for him, and her assignment is to find out how Vandamm’s operation is smuggling secret information out of the United States. The Professor also tells Thornhill that there never was a George Kaplan; he is a fictional character made up to deceive Vandamm and his men. The Professor and Thornhill trail Vandamm and Kendall to Rapid City, South Dakota, where Kendall pretends to shoot Thornhill in order to maintain her cover. However, when Thornhill secretly goes to Vandamm’s house, he overhears a conversation that makes it clear Vandamm and his men know Kendall is a spy. Thornhill and Kendall escape, ending up atop Mount Rushmore. As the couple navigates the perilous climb down, Thornhill tangles with Vandamm’s henchmen. Just as it appears all is lost, the police arrive, and Thornhill and Kendall are saved.
North by Northwest is widely regarded as the classic Hitchcock film. It features taut suspense and black humour—the script was by Ernest Lehman, who received an Academy Award nomination—and has all the hallmarks of a Hitchcock movie, including the theme of mistaken identity. North by Northwest is highlighted by a number of iconic sequences; the crop-duster chase and the climax on Mount Rushmore are considered seminal moments in cinematic history. Grant gave a typically charismatic performance, and Saint ably filled the role of Hitchcock’s quintessential “cool blond.” Also earning praise was Mason as the villainous Vandamm and Jessie Royce Landis as Thornhill’s humorous mother.
