One-Eyed Jacks,  American western film, released in 1961, that was the only movie directed by Marlon Brando. Although often overshadowed by its well-publicized production problems—notably Brando’s excessive expenditure of time and money—the film earned positive reviews and became a cult favourite.
In the aftermath of a bank robbery, Dad Longworth (played by Karl Malden) double-crosses his friend and partner, Rio (Brando), leaving him to take the fall (and the jail sentence) for the crime. Five years later Rio escapes from prison and, consumed by revenge, tracks down Dad, who is now living a respectable life as the sheriff of Monterey, California. Dad is married to a local woman, Maria (Katy Jurado), and he prides himself on being a good stepfather to her daughter, Louisa (Pina Pellicer). Although initially wary of Rio’s motives, Dad accepts his former partner’s lies when he says that he bears Dad no malice. Rio subsequently seduces Louisa, outraging Dad. After Rio kills a man in self-defense, Dad beats him and forces him to leave. While recovering, Rio realizes his love for Louisa is stronger than his need for revenge, and he returns to take her with him. However, after an attempted bank robbery—with which Rio is not involved—Dad intends to try Rio in a kangaroo court and then see him hang. Rio escapes and kills Dad in a gunfight. Rio and Louisa, who is pregnant, then make plans to marry.
Although Brando would never again find himself behind the camera, he acquitted himself well, winning favourable—if not enthusiastic—reviews as both director and star. However, his lack of discipline resulted in costly budget overruns. His final cut ran more than five hours, and Paramount executives eventually shortened the film into a still-leisurely 141 minutes. Although occasionally uneven, One-Eyed Jacks is a compelling morality tale, with strong chemistry between Brando and Malden. Brando’s reputation suffered further in 1962 when the box-office failure of MGM’s Mutiny on the Bounty was blamed on his recalcitrant behaviour during production.
