One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest ,  American dramatic film, released in 1975, that was based on the 1962 novel of the same name by Ken Kesey. The movie, directed by Miloš Forman and starring Jack Nicholson, was the first film since It Happened One Night (1934) to win the Academy Awards for best picture, director, lead actor, lead actress, and screenplay. It also earned six Golden Globe Awards, including that for best drama, and six BAFTA Awards, including that for best film, and was selected in 1993 for preservation in the National Film Registry.
The movie is set during the early 1960s in the security ward of a state mental hospital and begins with the unit’s morning routine. Nurse Ratched (played by Louise Fletcher) enters for work, and the patients line up to receive their medications. A new inmate, R.P. McMurphy (Nicholson), arrives as a transfer from a prison work farm. As soon as he arrives on the ward, McMurphy begins interfering with the routines established by Nurse Ratched. At a group therapy session, McMurphy suggests a change in the daily schedule to allow the inmates to watch the World Series on television. Nurse Ratched, after saying that a change in routine is inadvisable, suggests that a vote be taken; almost all the patients in the therapy session vote against the proposed change. Afterward, when inmates Harding (William Redfield) and Taber (Christopher Lloyd) get into a fight over a game of Monopoly, McMurphy sprays them with a hose and then announces that he is going to throw a water fountain through a window and escape to watch the World Series. He is unable to lift the water fountain, however. At the next group therapy session, after Nurse Ratched shames Billy Bibbit (Brad Dourif) by asking him why he did not disclose to his mother that he had once fallen in love, Cheswick (Sydney Lassik) and McMurphy ask for a vote on watching the next game in the World Series. This time all the patients in the group vote in favour, but Nurse Ratched points out that those in therapy are only half of the inmates on the ward, and so the proposed change is denied.
Later, in the yard, McMurphy climbs onto the shoulders of the gigantic and seemingly deaf and mute American Indian Chief Bromden (Will Sampson) and over the security fence to hide in a bus that is waiting to take inmates on a scheduled field trip. After the patients have boarded the bus, McMurphy drives it to a boat chartering service—first stopping to pick up a friend, Candy (Marya Small)—and he takes them out fishing. They return happily to the dock only to find several police officers and Dr. Spivey (Dean Brooks) waiting for them. Back at the hospital, Dr. Spivey and other doctors agree that McMurphy is not mentally disturbed and should be returned to the prison. Nurse Ratched persuades them that she can help him if he remains on the ward. After having learned from an orderly that he can be held in the hospital past the end of his sentence, McMurphy inquires at a group therapy session as to why no one told him that he could be kept in the hospital indefinitely. Nurse Ratched tells him that many of the inmates choose to remain in the hospital. When other patients begin objecting to various restrictions, the session descends into chaos, and Cheswick, Chief Bromden, and McMurphy are sent to receive electroshock therapy. While they are waiting, Chief Bromden reveals to McMurphy that he is neither deaf nor mute but feigns the conditions in order to be left alone, and they make plans to escape together. The night of the planned escape, McMurphy’s friends Candy and Rose (Louisa Moritz) arrive bearing liquor. McMurphy bribes the night watchman, Turkle (Scatman Crothers), to let them onto the ward and awakens the inmates. A drunken revel ensues. The day shift, including Nurse Ratched, arrive the following morning to find the ward trashed, the inmates passed out on the floor, and Bibbit in bed with Candy. After Nurse Ratched shames him, Bibbit commits suicide. McMurphy, enraged, attacks Nurse Ratched and attempts to strangle her, but an orderly knocks him out.
One night sometime later, Chief Bromden watches two orderlies return McMurphy to the ward and place him in his bed. Chief tells McMurphy that now is the time to escape. McMurphy does not respond, and Chief realizes that he has been rendered helpless by a lobotomy. Chief says that he will not leave McMurphy in that condition and, in an act of mercy, smothers him with a pillow. Chief Bromden then pulls up a water fountain, throws it through a window, and exits.
Kesey’s novel was adapted by Dale Wasserman into a play that opened on Broadway in 1963 and featured Kirk Douglas as McMurphy. Douglas acquired the film rights to the novel and held them for more than a decade. He later transferred those rights to his son, Michael Douglas, who coproduced the movie with Saul Zaentz. Kesey was so displeased with the film, however, that he filed suit against the production. The movie was shot in the Oregon State Hospital, and Dean Brooks, who portrayed Dr. Spivey, was that institution’s superintendent. One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest also marked the credited film debuts of Brad Dourif, Christopher Lloyd, and Will Sampson.
