Open City, also called Rome, Open City, Italian Roma città aperta,  Italian Neorealist film, released in 1945, that portrayed life in Nazi-occupied Rome during World War II. Directed by Roberto Rossellini in a documentary style that was innovative for the time, the movie brought international attention to the Neorealist movement and became one of its defining works, influencing numerous later filmmakers.
The film depicts a wide cross section of Romans who, despite their obvious social, economic, and religious differences, are united in their suffering during the German occupation. Pina (played by Anna Magnani) is a widowed pregnant working-class mother of two children; her fiancé, Francesco (Francesco Grandjacquet), works for a communist newspaper and aids the resistance; Marina (Maria Michi) is a nightclub singer whose desire for love and normality leads to collaboration with the enemy; Marina’s former boyfriend, Giorgio Manfredi, who is also known as Luigi Ferraris (Marcello Pagliero), is a resistance leader hunted by the Nazis; and Don Pietro Pellegrini (Aldo Fabrizi) is a lovable priest who musters unexpected bravery and courage to aid the resistance. Don Pietro and Manfredi are eventually caught by the Gestapo, and Manfredi is tortured in front of the priest, who refuses to betray his friend (who is an atheist) or his faith. Don Pietro’s relationship with Manfredi, and Pina’s pending (Roman Catholic) marriage to a communist, reflect the united front that developed among those in the resistance movement in their struggle against the Nazis.
Because of the recentness of the events depicted on the screen—Open City was shot just months after the Allies liberated Rome—Rossellini considered calling the film A Story of Yesterday. He used the city’s still rubble-strewn streets and war-damaged buildings to great effect, and he maintained realism with his cast, many of whom were not actors; real German POWs portrayed enemy soldiers. The screenplay, which was cowritten by Federico Fellini, earned an Academy Award nomination. Open City, along with Paisan (1946) and Germany Year Zero (1947), formed Rossellini’s “war trilogy.”
