Platoon,  American war film, released in 1986, that was written and directed by Oliver Stone and was regarded by many critics as one of the best of the movies about the Vietnam War. Platoon won the Academy Award for best picture and the Golden Globe Award for best drama.
The film presents the war through the eyes of new recruit Chris Taylor (played by Charlie Sheen). Taylor is a naïve middle-class young man who dropped out of college to volunteer for Vietnam for idealistic reasons. The movie begins with Taylor’s arrival at Da Nang in September 1967. He is assigned to an infantry division that is fighting near the border with Cambodia. His platoon commander is Lieutenant Wolfe (Mark Moses), but authority in the unit actually rests with Sgt. Barnes (Tom Berenger), a tough, experienced, and merciless fighter, and Sgt. Elias (Willem Dafoe), who is likewise tough and experienced but who strives to hold fast to his moral centre. Shortly, Elias’s squad, consisting largely of green recruits, is sent out on patrol. When night falls, a watch is set. One of the soldiers falls asleep on watch, and the unit is ambushed. A soldier is killed, and Taylor is wounded.
On New Year’s Day 1968, on patrol, the platoon comes across what seems to be a recently abandoned enemy bunker. The bunker is booby-trapped, however, and three men are killed. The enraged soldiers approach a nearby village and begin ruthlessly rounding up residents. The acts of brutality escalate after a weapons cache is found. Barnes questions the village chief (Bernardo Manalili), using Lerner (Johnny Depp) as a translator. The man denies that the villagers aid the North Vietnamese armed forces. When the man’s wife (Than Rogers) arrives, screaming at Barnes, he shoots her dead. Elias later tells Captain Harris (Dale Dye) that he wants to file a report against Barnes for shooting the village chief’s wife, and Harris tells Barnes that he will be court-martialed if there is evidence that he committed an illegal shooting.
On the next patrol, the platoon is caught in an ambush. After Wolfe calls in the wrong coordinates, resulting in an American artillery strike on the platoon’s position, Elias takes Taylor and two other men on a mission to intercept flanking enemy troops. He gives them instructions and goes on his own to another position. Barnes goes after them, and he shoots Elias and later tells Taylor that Elias is dead. Helicopters pick up the surviving members of the platoon, but as they are lifting off, Elias emerges from the jungle, fleeing from several North Vietnamese soldiers, and he is killed. Later, Taylor, certain that Barnes shot Elias, attacks Barnes, who pulls a knife and cuts Taylor’s face before walking away. The following day the depleted platoon is sent again to the front lines, and the members set up defensive positions. That night they are attacked with overwhelming force. A horrific battle ensues, and Captain Harris orders an air strike on their position, knowing that the battle is lost. In the chaos, Taylor and Barnes encounter each other, and Barnes moves to kill Taylor moments before both are knocked back by ordnance dropped from a plane. The following morning, the ground is littered with corpses, both American and Vietnamese. Taylor, wounded, staggers to his feet. He sees Barnes crawling away. Barnes orders Taylor to call for a medic but Taylor instead kills Barnes. Taylor and the other wounded members of the platoon are evacuated, and, in a voiceover, Taylor reflects on what he learned from his experiences.
Stone based the movie on his own experiences as a volunteer in the Vietnam War. He won a BAFTA award, a Golden Globe, and an Oscar for his direction, and he was awarded the Silver Bear for best director at the Berlin International Film Festival. Dale Dye, who played Captain Harris, also served as a military adviser on the movie, and he put the principal actors through a mock boot camp before filming began. He later wrote a novelization of Platoon.
