Red River,  American western film, released in 1948, that is widely considered director Howard Hawks’s most-enduring movie. The classic epic has been described as a western version of the film Mutiny on the Bounty.
Tom Dunson (played by John Wayne) is a young man with dreams of establishing his own cattle ranch. He and his fiancée are part of a wagon train heading west into Native American territory. Tom and his friend Groot (Walter Brennan) leave the wagon train to lay claim to suitable land for the future ranch on the Red River. However, while they are away, the wagon train is attacked by Comanches, who slaughter the settlers. Feeling responsible for not protecting his fiancée, Tom becomes embittered. When he later encounters a boy, Matt Garth, who escaped the massacre, he unofficially adopts him. Some 15 years later, Matt (Montgomery Clift) is Tom’s right-hand man, helping oversee the cattle empire. Financial necessity forces Tom to drive his entire herd more than 1,000 miles (1,600 km) to market in Missouri, a seemingly impossible undertaking. En route, Tom’s strict disciplinary measures affect morale. When he threatens to hang some men for minor offenses, even Matt rebels, and he reluctantly takes over the cattle drive. Tom, now humiliated, rides off but swears to kill Matt. Against all odds, Matt successfully delivers the herd to Missouri. However, his joy is short-lived. Tom soon arrives in town, and the two men fight until finally they realize that they care for each other.
Red River was especially notable for the performances by Wayne and Clift in roles originally envisioned for Gary Cooper and Cary Grant. Wayne drew particular praise, playing a character who was much older than himself. His final confrontation with Clift is a classic movie fight sequence. Red River had similarities with Mutiny on the Bounty, a novel by Charles Nordoff and James Norman Hall that was inspired by an actual mutiny on the HMS Bounty in 1789; the work was made into several popular films.
