Ride the High Country,  American western film, released in 1962, that was a revisionist take on the genre. It was the second movie by director Sam Peckinpah, and its embittered characters and realistic gunplay began to establish the formulas for which he became famous.
Ex-lawman Steve Judd (played by Joel McCrea) has fallen on hard times. He takes a job transporting gold deposits from a mining camp in the Sierra Nevadas across the mountains to a bank. He is pleased when his old friend Gil Westrum (Randolph Scott), another ex-lawman, agrees to assist him. Gil’s young friend and protégé Heck Longtree (Ron Starr) also accompanies them on the dangerous journey. Along the way they rescue a desperate young woman, Elsa Knudsen (Mariette Hartley), from a horrific life with her abusive father. The men escort Elsa to her fiancé, Billy Hammond (James Drury), and the young couple are quickly married. However, Steve, Gil, and Heck must soon rescue her again when she discovers that she will have to endure Billy’s brothers, who intend on “sharing” her for their sexual pleasure. The situation becomes even more complicated when Steve learns that Gil and Heck intend to rob the gold shipment. He thwarts their plans, and Gil runs off, leaving Steve and Heck to face Billy and his brothers, who have ambushed them in the hopes of taking back Elsa. In the midst of the seemingly hopeless battle, Gil has pangs of conscience and returns in time to help Steve and Heck defeat their assailants. However, Steve has been mortally wounded. Gil makes a solemn promise to fulfill his mission to get the gold shipment to the bank.
MGM released Ride the High Country as a bottom-of-the-bill horse opera, resulting in the first of the seemingly endless battles Peckinpah would have with studio executives. Although initially ignored in the United States, the film (released in Europe as Guns in the Afternoon) was a major success abroad and over the years became recognized as an important work. While Ride the High Country was the last of Scott’s films, it marked Hartley’s debut.
