 In 1967 Roger Ebert became the chief film critic for the Chicago Sun-Times, a position he held for more than 40 years. During that time he became, in 1975, the first person to receive a Pulitzer Prize for film criticism, and he became one of the best-known American film critics through the television show he cohosted with Gene Siskel, eventually known simply as Siskel & Ebert. His essay on film in the 1978 edition of the Britannica publication The Great Ideas Today is long—more than 17,000 words—but eminently readable. Wedged between “Management Medicine: The Doctor’s Job Today” and “The Idea of Religion—Part Two,” it was accompanied by an editorial note that has the air of an apology:
The concerns of the editors of The Great Ideas Today notwithstanding, Ebert argued forcefully that film should be treated as an art equal to any other. His humane, engaged, and incisive criticism made him an invaluable guide to that art.
The movies probably inspire more critical nonsense than any other art form, and they are also probably looked at and written about with more ignorance. That may be a tribute of sorts: We assume we require some sort of preparation for the full experience of a work of painting, music, or dance, but film absolutely encourages us to let go of all our critical facilities—our self-consciousness, even—and simply sit back while pure experience washes over us.
It seems to follow that the bad movie directors are the ones who call attention to their work in self-conscious shots and self-evident strategies. The good ones, on the other hand, would seem to be those who, having an instinctive affinity for the medium, know how to let their movies flow, without the distractions of easily visible strategies. John Ford, so long ignored as a serious film artist, used to tell his interviewers again and again about “invisible cutting,” by which he meant filming and then editing a picture so smoothly that the narrative momentum meant more to the audience than anything else.
The mass movie audiences of the 1930s and 1940s would probably not have known what to make of Ford and his theory, but they knew that they liked his movies and those of the other great Hollywood craftsmen. They were also much less interested in the camera work than they were in whether the hero would get the girl. They were, to that degree, successful audiences, because they were passive ones. They let the movie happen to them, and no other art form encourages or rewards passive escapism more readily than film.
Maybe that is why movies have been held morally suspect from their earliest days. Great freedom of speech battles were fought and won for books such as Ulysses, but few people thought to apply the First Amendment to the movies. Of course movies could, and should, be censored!—just as Congress could, and should, exempt professional baseball from the protections of the Constitution. Movies were almost like drugs; they contained secrets, they could prey on us, they could influence our morals and our lives. If we were Catholics in the years before Vatican II, we even got up in church once a year and raised our right hands and took the pledge of the Legion of Decency and vowed to avoid immoral films. No other venue of possible transgression (not the pool hall, the saloon, not even the house of prostitution) was thought seductive enough to require a similar public pledge.
The movies were different. For most of us, in the first place, they were probably deeply associated with our earliest escapist emotions. We learned what comedy was in the movies. We learned what a hero was. We learned (although we hooted as we learned) that men and women occasionally interrupted the perfectly logical things they were doing, and…kissed each other! And then, a few years down the line, we found ourselves turning away from the screen to kiss our dates—for surely more first kisses have taken place in movie theaters than anywhere else. In adolescence, we tried out various adult role possibilities by watching films about them. We rebelled by proxy. We grew up, lusted, and learned by watching movies that considered so many concerns we did not find included in our daily possibilities.
During all these years of movies and experiences, though, we never really took the movies seriously. They found their direct routes into our minds, memories, and behavior, but they never seemed to pass through our thought processes. If we finally did, in college, subscribe to the fashionable belief that the director was the author of the film, and that one went to the new Hitchcock and not the new Cary Grant, we still had a sneaky suspicion that a good movie was a direct experience, one to be felt and not thought about. Walking out of the new Antonioni, Fellini, Truffaut, or Buñuel and meeting friends who had not seen it, we immediately fell into the old way of talking about who was in it, and what happened to them. It rarely occurred to us to discuss a specific shot or camera movement, and never to discuss a film’s overall visual strategy,
Movie criticism often fell (and still falls) under the same limitation. It is the easiest thing in the world to discuss a plot. It is wonderful to quote great lines of dialogue. We instinctively feel a sympathy for those actors and actresses who seem to connect with sympathies or needs we feel within ourselves. But the actual stuff of the movies—shots, compositions, camera movements, the use of the frame, the different emotional loads of the various areas of the screen—is of little interest. We may never forget what Humphrey Bogart said to Ingrid Bergman in Rick’s Cafe Americain in Casablanca, but we have already forgotten, if we ever knew, where they were placed in the frame. Fish do not notice water, birds do not notice air, and moviegoers do not notice the film medium.
That is how the great directors want it. Figuratively they want to stand behind our theater seats, take our heads in their hands, and command us: Look here, and now there, and feel this, and now that, and forget for the moment that you exist as an individual and that what you are watching is “only a movie.” It is not a coincidence, I believe, that so many of the films that have survived the test of time and are called “great” are also called, in the industry’s term, “audience pictures.” They tend to be the films in which the audience is fused together into one collective reacting personality. We enjoy such films more when we see them with others; they encourage and even demand the collective response.
Time will more and more reveal, I think, that the bad directors are the ones whose visual styles we are required to notice. Go to see Antonioni’s The Red Desert on the same bill with Fellini’s 8 1/2, as I once did, and you will feel the difference instantly: Antonioni, so studied, so self-conscious, so painstaking about his plans, creates a movie we can appreciate intellectually, but it bores us. Fellini, whose mastery of the camera is so infinitely more fluid, sweeps us through his fantasies without effort, and we are enthralled.
Having made these arguments, I would now like to introduce a paradox: I have taught classes for the last ten years in which we have used stop-action projectors or film analyzers to look at films a moment at a time. We have frozen frames and studied compositions as if they were still photographs. We have looked with great attention at the movements of both the camera and the objects within the frame (trying to discipline ourselves to regard Cary Grant and Ingrid Bergman as objects). We have, in short, tried to take the cinematic mechanism apart to see what makes it run; we have deliberately short-circuited the directors’ best attempts to make us give up our imaginations into their hands.
In the process, we have considered some of the fundamental rules of cinematic composition, such as that the right of the screen is more positive, or emotionally loaded, than the left, and that movement to the right seems more natural than movement to the left. We have noticed that the strongest vertical axis on the screen is not in the exact center but just to the right of it. (This business of the right being more positive than the left, by the way, seems to be related to the different natures of the two hemispheres of the brain: The right is more intuitive and emotional, the left more analytical and objective, and in the sensual escapism of the narrative film the left tends to give up the process of rational analysis and allow the right to become swept up in the story.) We have also talked about the greater strength of the foreground than the background, of the top over the bottom, and of how diagonals seem to want to escape the screen while horizontals and verticals seem content to remain where they are. We have talked about the dominance of movement over things at rest, and of how brighter colors advance while darker ones recede, and of how some directors seem to assign moral or judgmental values to areas within the frame, and then place their characters according to those values. And we have noticed what seems obvious, that closer shots tend to be more subjective and longer shots more objective, and that high angles diminish the importance of the subject but low angles enhance it.
We have talked about all of those things, and then we have turned down the lights and started the projector and looked one shot at a time at dozens of films, finding, for example, that not a single shot in any Hitchcock film seems to violate a single rule of the sort I have just indicated, but that there is hardly a comedy after Buster Keaton’s The General that seems to pay much heed to such principles. We have found that the handful of great films (not the “classics” that come out every month, but the great films) become more mysterious and affecting the more we study them, and that the director’s visual strategies can be read for intent, but no more reveal meanings than would the form of a sonnet betray Shakespeare’s heart. Even so, they provide a starting place if we want to free ourselves from an exclusive, almost instinctive, preoccupation with a film’s plot and move on to a more general appreciation of its visual totality.
One of my purposes, then, will be to discuss some of the technical truths, theories, and hunches that go into a director’s visual strategy. I would like later in this essay, for example, to consider in some detail the strategies in Ingmar Bergman’s Persona, and particularly the dream (or is it is a dream?) sequence—the meanings of its movements to the right and the left, and the way in which Liv Ullmann sweeps back Bibi Andersson’s hair, and the mystery of why that moment, properly appreciated, says as much about the nature of human identity as any other moment ever filmed. And I will also discuss at some length Robert Altman’s Three Women and the ways in which it begins as the apparent record of a slice of life, and then moves into realms of personal mystery.
My approach almost requires that the films be right there in front of us, and one of the problems unique to all forms of written criticism (except literary criticism) is that one medium must be discussed in terms of another. I would like to attempt it, though, in discussing three aspects of film that seem more interesting (and perhaps more puzzling) to me today than they did when I first found myself working as a professional film critic twelve years ago.
The first aspect has to do with the fact that we approach films differently than we did, say twenty years ago, so that we have new ways of categorizing, choosing, and regarding them. The second aspect has to do with a mystery: Why do we insist on forcing all films into paraphrasable narratives when the form itself so easily resists narrative and so many of the best films cannot be paraphrased? Shouldn’t we become more aware of how we really experience a film, and of how that experience differs from reading a novel or attending a play? The third aspect concerns the relationship of the film critic to his audience—but perhaps that will begin to demonstrate itself as we consider the first two areas.
