Scarface: The Shame of a Nation,  American gangster film, released in 1932, that is loosely based on the rise of Al Capone. It was an early success for both director Howard Hawks and actor Paul Muni.
The film traces the life and crimes of an ambitious gangster, Tony Camonte (played by Muni), as he systematically assassinates his enemies in order to rise to the top of Chicago’s gangland hierarchy. The film opens with his slaying of the “last of the old-fashioned gang leaders,” marking the ascent of a dangerous and greedy new breed of criminals. Though Camonte manages to become very rich, his avarice leads to his downfall. The character’s relationship with his headstrong younger sister (Ann Dvorak) was unusual for films of the time, as it displayed strongly incestuous undertones.
There were a number of notable gangster films before Scarface, but none were as realistic in their depiction of violence and brutality. The title villain—Muni in a star-making performance—is also devoid of any redeeming background information that would explain his life of crime. François Truffaut pointed out that director Hawks intentionally shot Muni as though he were a wild animal in order to capture the character’s sheer brutality. The film also features innovative camera work and editing, but the action behind the camera was equally fascinating. Hawks clashed constantly with producer Howard Hughes during production, and the film was almost canceled. Though it eventually became a major moneymaker, its release was delayed by extensive battles over censorship, which led to placatory edits, including the addition of the film’s damning subtitle. Among its top admirers was Capone, who was rumoured to have thrown Hawks a party to celebrate the movie and was said to have had his own private print of the film. The plot of Brian De Palma’s 1983 remake of the film, which starred Al Pacino, differs greatly from that of the original, though both share the subplot of the main character’s obsessive relationship with his sister.
