Shakespeare in Love,  American-British film, released in 1998, that was a lighthearted and clever imagining of how William Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet came to be written and produced. The movie, which satirizes theatre life and plays with what is known and what is unknown about Shakespeare’s life and times, won the Academy Award and the BAFTA Award for best film as well as the Golden Globe Award for best comedy or musical.
As the movie begins, Philip Henslowe (played by Geoffrey Rush), the owner of the Rose Theatre, is being tortured because he owes money to Hugh Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson). Henslowe persuades Fennyman that the new comedy being written for him by Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes), Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate’s Daughter, will bring in enough money to cover the debt. Shakespeare, however, is suffering from writer’s block and has written nothing. Later, in a tavern, another playwright, Christopher Marlowe (Rupert Everett, in an uncredited role) offers Shakespeare suggestions for the play’s plot. Henslowe, believing the play to be near completion, holds auditions. Thomas Kent, an actor auditioning for the part of Romeo, impresses Shakespeare but flees the theatre. Shakespeare follows him, unaware that he is in fact a young noblewoman, Viola De Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), all the way to Viola’s home. Viola’s nurse (Imelda Staunton) accepts a note from Shakespeare for Kent telling him that he has been cast. That night Shakespeare sneaks into a party celebrating Viola’s engagement to Lord Wessex (Colin Firth), but when Wessex notes the obvious attraction between Shakespeare and Viola, he threatens Shakespeare, who gives his name as Christopher Marlowe and flees the party. Feeling inspired, Shakespeare then begins writing the play.
The next day in the theatre, John Webster (Joe Roberts), who sought the part of Ethel, is dismissed, and the self-important actor Ned Alleyn (Ben Affleck) is persuaded to play the part of Mercutio. After rehearsal, Shakespeare discovers that Kent, the actor playing Romeo, is in fact Viola, and he and Viola begin a love affair as he continues working on the play, which becomes Romeo and Juliet. Viola is later summoned to an audience with Queen Elizabeth (Dame Judi Dench), because of her engagement to Wessex, and Elizabeth recognizes her as a fellow theatre enthusiast. Writing, rehearsals, and the love affair between Viola and Shakespeare continue, but Webster spies on them and alerts Tilney, the Master of the Revels (Simon Callow), that one of the actors is a woman (which is forbidden), and Master Tilney closes the Rose Theatre. As the actors mourn the demise of their play and their employment, Richard Burbage (Martin Clunes), proprietor of the rival Curtain Theatre, offers to stage the play. Rehearsals continue, with Shakespeare now playing Romeo, and the play is set to premiere on the same day that Viola is to marry Wessex. After the wedding, Viola’s nurse helps her to escape to the theatre to see the play. As it happens, the actor who is to play Juliet suddenly undergoes the voice change that comes with puberty, and Viola replaces him as Juliet. During the production, Wessex arrives. The play is a success, but Master Tilney shows up to arrest them all for putting on a play with a woman actor. Queen Elizabeth is in the audience, and she reveals herself suddenly and declares that the actor playing Juliet is Thomas Kent. Viola and Wessex depart for Wessex’s plantation in America, and Shakespeare begins writing a new play, Twelfth Night.
Writer Marc Norman, inspired by a suggestion from one of his sons, began writing a script for Shakespeare in Love in the late 1980s and sold it to Universal Pictures. The studio then brought in playwright Tom Stoppard to add to the script. However, the project fell through and remained inactive until Miramax Films became involved and John Madden was brought on board to direct. While the movie was a box-office and critical hit, its triumph at the Academy Awards was considered a major upset, as the World War II picture Saving Private Ryan was expected to win the best film award.
