Stagecoach,  American western film, released in 1939, that is a classic of the genre, widely considered to be the first “adult” western. One of director John Ford’s defining movies, it also elevated John Wayne to stardom.
The film opens as a stagecoach is set to make the perilous journey from Arizona to Lordsburg, New Mexico. Marshal Curley Wilcox (played by George Bancroft) and the stage driver Buck (Andy Devine) are responsible for overseeing the safety of an eclectic group of passengers that includes Dallas (Claire Trevor), a prostitute who is being evicted from town; Samuel Peacock (Donald Meek), a milquetoast whiskey salesman; Henry Gatewood (Berton Churchill), a corrupt banker attempting to abscond with stolen funds; Hatfield (John Carradine), a professional gambler and self-proclaimed southern gentleman who seeks to protect fellow passenger Lucy Mallory (Louise Platt), who is pregnant and hopes to reunite with her husband in Lordsburg, where he serves as an army officer; and Doc Boone (Thomas Mitchell), a charismatic drunkard. The nervous passengers are reassured that they will have a U.S. cavalry escort through Apache territory, where the tribe has been waging war on white settlers. Along the way they encounter the Ringo Kid (Wayne), an outlaw who is stranded in the territory. He is arrested by Curley, but when the stage loses its cavalry escort, Ringo’s abilities with a rifle prove to be crucial during an intense Indian attack. As the trek continues, Ringo falls in love with Dallas, not realizing she is a prostitute. After arriving in Lordsburg, a grateful Curley frees Ringo so that he can settle the score with the men who murdered his father and brother. Ringo kills them, and Curley then allows him to ride off with Dallas, so both young people can make a fresh start after their troubled pasts.
Stagecoach was Ford’s first western in more than a decade, and it helped elevate the genre from B-film status to serious fare. While it featured the tense action sequences that were standard for westerns, Dudley Nichols’s script offered psychological insight into the characters. The film was a breakthrough for Wayne, who had been toiling in lesser westerns. This was his first lead role in a Ford film, and the two men later collaborated on a number of movies, many of which came to define the genre. Stagecoach was shot in Utah and Arizona’s Monument Valley, which served as a frequent backdrop for Ford’s subsequent films.
