The Sand Pebbles,  American war film, released in 1966, that proved controversial for its parallels to the ongoing Vietnam War (1954–75). Steve McQueen earned his only Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of an alienated and disillusioned sailor.
The Sand Pebbles opens in 1926 as China is gripped by an open rebellion against foreign interventionism. Jake Holman (played by McQueen) is a rebellious young U.S. Navy machinist who is assigned to the USS San Pablo, a gunboat that patrols China’s Yangtze River but is ordered to remain neutral during the conflict. Jake’s status as a loner results in him being despised by his fellow crewmates and the ship’s captain (Richard Crenna). He does, however, befriend the affable Frenchy (Richard Attenborough), who falls in love with and marries a local woman. Jake also acts as mentor to a gentle and loyal Chinese labourer, Po-han (Mako), and he forms a mildly romantic relationship with Shirley Eckert (Candice Bergen), a young American woman who is en route with her father to run a remote missionary school. As political tensions rise, so does the potential for violence against the American presence. Hoping to provoke the crew of the San Pablo, a crowd captures and tortures Po-han, and it falls to Jake to fire the shot that puts him out of his misery. Frenchy subsequently dies after an ill-advised attempt to reunite with his bride, and Chinese nationalists later kill the woman and accuse Jake of the crime. The San Pablo manages to leave the area and later travels upriver to save Shirley and her fellow missionaries from certain death. The ship encounters resistance but emerges victorious in a spectacular and bloody battle on the Yangtze. Jake, the captain, and a small rescue party eventually reach the mission, but they find themselves trapped, with tragic consequences.
The Sand Pebbles was a major career achievement for director Robert Wise, though he was denied an Oscar nomination. The movie, which was adapted from a novel by Richard McKenna, features stunning visuals and one of Jerry Goldsmith’s finest scores. The acting was also notable, with especially fine performances from McQueen and Mako.
