The Candidate,  American film drama, released in 1972, that offered a behind-the-scenes look at political campaigning in the United States in the age of television. The film examines the candidacy of an idealistic young lawyer, Bill McKay, who is running for the United States Senate from the state of California. In contrast to the heroic depiction of political leaders in such classic Hollywood films as Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939), The Candidate adopts a more cynical view of politics. In the film, McKay, albeit reluctantly, eventually compromises his beliefs in exchange for victory. The film’s depiction of political expediency is reflective of post-1960s American pessimism toward government.
Director Michael Ritchie and leading actor Robert Redford envisioned The Candidate to be part of a trilogy that they would produce on the American obsession with winning. In the film, McKay initially pursues political office with noble intentions and little chance of success. He is unafraid to speak his mind on the issues. As the campaign proceeds and his polling numbers increase, McKay realizes that he might indeed stand a chance at victory. Unwilling to antagonize potential voters, his positions on issues become more vague, and he begins to mistrust his political instincts. McKay becomes increasingly dependent on the advice of his campaign manager and media consultants. He comes to realize that, in the television era, platforms are no longer as important as image.
The Candidate provides critical insight into how a modern image-based campaign is run. Political staffers coach McKay on how best to answer reporters’ questions, the candidate practices canned responses for supposedly spontaneous televised debates, film editors piece together video clips designed to portray McKay in the most positive light, and influential party leaders hobnob with celebrities at campaign dinners. Above all, campaigning is laborious work designed to market the candidate as advertisers would sell a bar of soap. Thanks to his media-driven campaign, McKay wins an upset victory in the senatorial election but is left with a sense that he has lost touch with his motivation to run for office in the first place.
Jeremy Larner, who won an academy award for the film’s screenplay, was active in politics. In 1968 he worked as a speechwriter for the presidential campaign of Senator Eugene McCarthy, and his political experience provided the film with a great amount of authentic detail. Larner was deeply committed to the McCarthy campaign but was ultimately disappointed with the experience, finding campaign coworkers to be petty and McCarthy indecisive. Larner’s frustration at the political process set the tone for the film and mirrored the public’s wish for better government.
The early 1970s were a contentious time in the United States. Domestic and foreign policy conflicts polarized the country and eroded public confidence in the credibility of its leaders. The Candidate captured that loss of faith.
