The Godfather: Part II,  American gangster film, released in 1974, that was a sequel and companion piece to the 1972 blockbuster The Godfather, adapted from the 1969 novel by Mario Puzo. In the years since its release the film has gained the reputation of being the rare sequel that equals or perhaps surpasses the original.
The Godfather: Part II juxtaposes two stories: that of Michael Corleone (played, as in The Godfather, by Al Pacino) in the years after he becomes head of the Corleone family business and that of his father, Vito Corleone, as a young man (portrayed by Robert De Niro). In the former storyline, set in the 1950s, Michael has moved the family and his base of operations to Nevada, seeking to expand his influence into Las Vegas and also into Havana. The other storyline shows Vito first as a child arriving in New York City in the early 1900s after his family in Sicily was killed by the local Mafia. As a young man, he is introduced into criminal activity by his friend Clemenza (Bruno Kirby), beginning with thievery. When a neighbourhood crime boss (Gastone Moschin) demands a cut of Vito’s profits, however, Vito murders him. Vito gains more power and respect while retaining his devotion to family. In the other narrative, Michael turns down a request from Frankie Pentangeli (Michael V. Gazzo) to approve a hit in New York City, because it would interfere with business with Jewish crime kingpin Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg). Michael’s story then becomes one of betrayal, deceit, and paranoia. He is targeted by assassination attempts and government investigations. His wife (Diane Keaton) leaves him, his brother Fredo (John Cazale) turns against him, and he ceases to trust the consigliere Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall). In the end, Michael is left alone, having lost his family and his essential humanity.
The part of the film dealing with Vito Corleone’s rise to become the don of his own crime family was adapted from the novel The Godfather, but Puzo and cowriter and director Francis Ford Coppola created the story of Michael’s journey into soullessness for the movie. Most actors from The Godfather returned in their original roles, including Talia Shire as Connie Corleone, but Strasberg, a renowned acting teacher, made his film debut in the movie. The Godfather: Part II was the first sequel to win an Academy Award for best picture. De Niro, whose dialogue in the film was almost entirely in the Sicilian dialect, was the second actor to win an Oscar for playing Don Vito Corleone—and the second who was not present at the ceremony. De Niro was working on another project at the time, and Coppola accepted the award on his behalf.
