The French Connection,  American crime thriller film, released in 1971, that became known for having one of the most exciting and iconic car chases in cinematic history.  The movie, which features other tense action sequences, centres on violent and unlikable New York City narcotics detectives on the trail of international heroin dealers. Critically acclaimed, it won five Academy Awards, including that for best picture.
The film begins in Marseille, France, where an undercover police officer is killed by Pierre Nicoli (played by Marcel Bozzuffi), a hit man who works for criminal mastermind Alain Charnier (Fernando Rey). In Brooklyn, Detective Jimmy (“Popeye”) Doyle (Gene Hackman), dressed as a street-corner Santa, and his partner, Buddy (“Cloudy”) Russo (Roy Scheider), roust a small-time drug dealer from a bar and beat him up, trying to get him to name his supplier. After work, the two detectives go to a bar, where they notice a free-spending man, Sal Boca (Tony Lo Bianco), and, on a hunch, decide to tail him and his wife, Angie (Arlene Farber). Popeye and Cloudy learn that Sal and Angie have criminal backgrounds, and as the surveillance continues, Sal visits the home of Joel Weinstock (Harold Gary), a known drug financier. Also, an undercover informant discloses to Popeye and Cloudy that the arrival of a large drug shipment is anticipated. The detectives persuade their boss, Walt Simonson (Eddie Egan), to allow wiretaps on the home and business telephones of Sal and Angie. Federal agents Mulderig (Bill Hickman) and Klein (Sonny Grosso) are assigned to work the case with Popeye and Cloudy.
Charnier and Nicoli arrive in New York with French celebrity Henri Devereaux (Frédéric de Pasquale). Devereaux has brought his car, a Lincoln that has been secretly loaded with heroin. Popeye, Cloudy, and Mulderig observe a meeting between Sal and Charnier, and Popeye later tails Charnier to his hotel. In the meantime, Sal and Weinstock meet a chemist (Pat McDermott), who tests a sample of heroin and declares it to be 89 percent pure. The next morning, Popeye tries to follow Charnier from his hotel, but Charnier is able to elude him. Later, as Popeye returns to his home, Nicoli attempts to shoot him and then flees to the elevated train. Popeye commandeers a car and gives chase. After the train crashes, Nicoli frees himself from the wreckage but is shot dead by Popeye.
Later, Sal parks Devereaux’s Lincoln on a side street. Popeye and Cloudy search the car and find the heroin but leave it undisturbed. Charnier then takes the car to an abandoned factory building, where he plans to sell the heroin to Sal and Weinstock. However, the police arrive, and a firefight ensues. Sal is killed, and Weinstock surrenders. Popeye, hunting for Charnier, accidentally kills Mulderig but continues his search for Charnier. As the screen goes black, a single shot rings out. Text reveals that Charnier escaped, Popeye and Cloudy were reassigned, and only Devereaux served significant time in prison.
The French Connection was adapted by writer Ernest Tidyman from a 1969 nonfiction book of the same name by Robin Moore; Moore’s book tells the story of a 1961 narcotics case. The character of Popeye was based on Eddie Egan, who played Simonson in the movie, and Cloudy was based on Sonny Grosso, who played federal agent Klein. Hickman, who was cast as Mulderig, was known as a stunt driver and served as the film’s stunt coordinator. The movie depends for much of its effect on skilled editing, and director William Friedkin often acknowledged his debt to film editor Jerry Greenberg. In 2005 The French Connection was selected for inclusion in the National Film Registry.
