The Man Who Knew Too Much,  American thriller film, released in 1956, that was Alfred Hitchcock’s remake of his 1934 classic and is widely considered equal, if not superior, to the original.
Dr. Ben McKenna (played by James Stewart) and his wife, Jo (Doris Day), are vacationing in Morocco with their young son, Hank (Christopher Olsen). They befriend a mysterious man, who is later stabbed in the marketplace. Before dying, he manages to whisper to Ben that a famous statesman will be murdered soon in London and that police should investigate “Ambrose Chapel.” Ben and Jo return to their hotel to find that Hank has been kidnapped by the Draytons (Bernard Miles and Brenda de Banzie), a seemingly nice couple who were watching him. The McKennas are told that if they go to authorities with the dead man’s information, Hank will be killed.
Desperate, Ben and Jo fly to London, where they learn that Ambrose Chapel is a place, not a person. When they get to the chapel, they discover the Draytons and their son. However, the kidnappers escape with Hank before the police arrive. The McKennas then head to the Royal Albert Hall, where they hope to find the Scotland Yard inspector they had spoken to earlier. Once there, they realize that a foreign prime minister is to be assassinated during the concert. As Ben searches frantically for the assassin, Jo spots a gun being pointed through a curtain. Her scream startles the gunman, causing him to only wound the statesman. Ben struggles with the would-be assassin, and the man falls to his death. The grateful prime minister invites Ben and Jo to a reception in their honour at his embassy. Upon arrival, the McKennas discover that Hank is being held captive upstairs. While Jo, a world-renowned singer, keeps the attendees entertained, Ben tries to rescue Hank, but the two end up being held at gunpoint by Edward Drayton, who attempts to use them as hostages to effect his escape. Ben, however, manages to knock the man down a long stairway to his death.
While some questioned the need for a remake, The Man Who Knew Too Much was a huge box-office success in 1956. Although Stewart was an obvious casting choice—this was his third Hitchcock film—the selection of Day for the female lead surprised many, though she acquitted herself nicely in one of her few dramatic roles. She also sang the theme song “Whatever Will Be, Will Be (Que Sera, Sera),” which won an Academy Award and became one of her most popular songs.
