The Searchers,  American western film, released in 1956, that is widely considered director John Ford’s masterpiece. It features John Wayne in one of his most-notable performances, portraying perhaps the most morally ambiguous character of his career.
Ethan Edwards (played by Wayne) is a mysterious drifter who arrives at the Texas ranch of his brother Aaron (Walter Coy) in the aftermath of the American Civil War. He is warmly greeted by Aaron and his family: his wife, Martha (Dorothy Jordan), and their daughters Lucy (Pippa Scott) and Debbie (played by both Lana Wood and Natalie Wood). Ethan is clearly a controversial figure, and there are implications that he has engaged in legally dubious actions. When Ethan and other local men are lured out to chase Native Americans who have stolen cattle, Aaron’s ranch is attacked by Scar (Henry Brandon), a feared Comanche chief, who murders Aaron and Martha and kidnaps their daughters. Enraged, Ethan embarks on an obsessive crusade to track down Scar and rescue the girls. He is initially joined by a local posse as well as Martin Pawley (Jeffrey Hunter), a young man who is considered the Edwardses’ adopted son. Ethan’s hard-bitten ways eventually alienate most of his allies, but he and Martin continue their quest, even after they discover that Lucy has been murdered. The search goes on for years, with Ethan’s motivations coming under question as his racist anger toward Native Americans suggests that he might kill the girl he initially sought to save.
The Searchers was described by Ford as a “psychological epic,” and the complexity of its characters and their motives has provoked much analysis. The film’s exploration of racism and intolerance drew particular attention. Although today regarded as a classic, The Searchers did not receive any Academy Award nominations. Winton C. Hoch’s cinematography captures the beauty of Monument Valley, Utah, and the final frames of Ethan are haunting and legendary. Max Steiner’s score was also acclaimed. The Searchers was based on Alan Le May’s 1954 novel of the same name, and it shared similarities with the true story of Cynthia Ann Parker, who was kidnapped by Comanches as a child in the early 19th century and was mother to the warrior Quanah Parker. The film proved highly influential to subsequent directors, notably Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, and George Lucas.
