The Detective,  American crime thriller film, released in 1968, that was based on Roderick Thorp’s best-selling novel (1966) of the same name and featured one of the first mainstream discussions in American film of homosexuality. Frank Sinatra’s dramatic role, as the title character, was one of his last and one of his most intense.
When Teddy Leikman (played by James Inman), the homosexual son of a powerful businessman, is found beaten and mutilated, New York City police detective Joe Leland (Sinatra) is assigned to crack the gruesome case. After wringing a confession out of Leikman’s roommate, Felix Tesla (Tony Musante), Leland wins a promotion, and Tesla is swiftly executed. The turn of events makes Leland uneasy, however, as he knows that Tesla had been psychologically unstable. Leland then meets Norma (Jacqueline Bisset), the widow of a prominent accountant, Colin MacIver (William Windom), who has supposedly jumped to his death. She suspects her husband was actually murdered, and when Leland agrees to reopen the case, he not only encounters resistance from city officials and the police establishment but also suffers an attempt on his life. His investigation eventually reveals that MacIver killed Leikman, with whom he was intimately involved, before committing suicide and that high-ranking officials participated in a cover-up. Alarmed by official corruption and the realization that he contributed to the execution of an innocent man, Leland quits the police force.
Along with Bullitt and Coogan’s Bluff, The Detective made 1968 a banner year for hip, tough celluloid sleuths. The film was Sinatra’s fourth collaboration with director Gordon Douglas—after Young at Heart (1954), Robin and the Seven Hoods (1964), and Tony Rome (1967)—although it was a far more sombre affair than those pictures. The Detective offered the most explicit Hollywood depiction of gay life to date, and—though it presented the lifestyle as wholly vulgar—the script was considered progressive in its treatment of homophobia and antigay discrimination. Mia Farrow, Sinatra’s wife at the time, was originally cast as Norma MacIver, but she was forced to turn down the role when the filming of Rosemary’s Baby, in which she starred, fell behind schedule; Sinatra filed for divorce soon after.
