The Ipcress File,  British spy film, released in 1965, that was considered among the best of the genre, noted for a realism that was absent in the James Bond movies. It was the first of several films that featured Michael Caine in the lead role of Harry Palmer.
Palmer, a British military intelligence agent, is reassigned by his superior, Ross (played by Guy Doleman), to work in a unit headed by Dalby (Nigel Green). Palmer is tasked with investigating the disappearance of Dr. Radcliffe (Aubrey Richards), who is the latest in a string of important scientists to vanish. It is feared that, as with the others, Radcliffe will reappear without his scientific abilities. As the investigation becomes increasingly complex and dangerous, Palmer discovers a crucial clue known as IPCRESS but does not know its meaning. He is subsequently kidnapped and subjected to an intense brainwashing treatment, which he realizes the scientists have also undergone. He also discovers that IPCRESS is the abbreviation for the name of the brainwashing program. Although Palmer resists, he appears to fall under the spell of his “masters,” who intend to use a trigger phrase to make him carry out their commands. He suspects that Ross is a double agent behind the scheme, but he also has doubts about Dalby. When Palmer confronts the men at gunpoint, each tries to convince him that the other is the enemy agent. Palmer, however, recognizes that Dalby is using the trigger phrase to get him to kill Ross. Palmer manages to break the spell and kills Dalby as the man attempts to go for his gun.
The Ipcress File was based on Len Deighton’s 1962 novel of the same name. The film brought international acclaim to Caine, who gave a nuanced performance as the bespectacled antihero who lacks the suave sophistication ordinarily seen in onscreen spies. Although positioned as an alternative to James Bond, the movie included a number of people who had worked on the 007 series, including producer Harry Saltzman, composer John Barry, and production designer Ken Adams. The Ipcress File received high praise, especially in England, where it was named the best British film of 1965 by BAFTA (British Academy of Film and Television Arts). Caine later reprised the role of Palmer in Funeral in Berlin (1966), Billion Dollar Brain (1967), Bullet to Beijing (1995), and Midnight in Saint Petersburg (1996).
