The Adventures of Robin Hood,  American romantic adventure film, released in 1938, that is considered one of the great cinematic adventures and starred Errol Flynn in what became the defining role of his career.
The film tells the tale of Robin Hood, with Flynn as the legendary bandit trying to aid the king of England, Richard the Lion-Heart (played by Ian Hunter), who has been captured on his return from the Crusades. After accusing Richard’s devious brother Prince John (Claude Rains) of plotting to usurp the throne, Robin decamps to Sherwood Forest, where he assembles a band of men to defy John’s excessive taxes on the poor by stealing from the rich and redistributing the wealth. Intercepting John’s associates Sir Guy of Gisbourne (Basil Rathbone) and the Sheriff of Nottingham (Melville Cooper) in the forest, Robin seizes a collection of tax money and warns their companion, Maid Marian (Olivia de Havilland), of their wicked intentions. The sheriff subsequently holds an archery tournament to lure Robin out of the forest; when Robin wins, he is arrested and sentenced to death. Although Marian quickly alerts Robin’s men, who are able to save him from execution, she is imprisoned when her allegiance to Robin is discovered. Meanwhile, Richard returns to England, his ransom having been paid, and helps Robin and his men thwart John’s attempted coronation. John is thereafter banished, and plans are made for Robin and Marian to marry.
The Adventures of Robin Hood was originally envisioned with James Cagney playing the lead. However, when Cagney became embroiled in a contract dispute, the role went to Flynn, who had become a matinee idol with Captain Blood (1935). The film is in Technicolor and features an Academy Award-winning score by Erich Wolfgang Korngold, one of the pioneers of film music. Flynn received outstanding support from his fellow cast members, especially de Havilland and Rathbone. The latter’s stiff courtliness and regal but nefarious ways provide the perfect foil to Flynn’s easy charm. Rathbone and Flynn’s climactic fencing sequence, in which both actors performed most of their own stunts, is wonderfully choreographed, with shadows of the fighting dancing dramatically on castle walls. Although the movie’s budget of $2 million was at the time a staggering figure, and financial woes during the shoot led the studio to replace director William Keighley with Michael Curtiz, the film became a box-office hit.
