The Alamo,  American epic film, released in 1960, that was John Wayne’s dream project about the Battle of the Alamo (1836).
Frontier legend Davy Crockett (played by Wayne) and his men arrive in San Antonio, Texas, and volunteer to help defend the Alamo, a hopelessly outgunned mission-turned-fort that is about to be assaulted by Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna’s Mexican army. The post is commanded by Col. William Travis (Laurence Harvey), a courageous but overly strict officer whose methods clash with those of the folksy Crockett and his fellow legendary frontiersman Jim Bowie (Richard Widmark). Travis hopes to hold the Alamo long enough for Sam Houston (Richard Boone) to send additional troops. When word arrives that the reinforcements have been massacred en route, Travis gives the volunteers permission to leave the fortress, as they would face certain death against overwhelming odds. To a man, they opt to stay. Moved by their courage, Travis mounts an aggressive plan to forestall the inevitable defeat. The Alamo defenders repel the first attack but cannot hold off the second assault. Travis dies in battle. Crockett is killed by a lance, but before he dies, he manages to ignite the ammunition depot in a spectacular explosion, and the wounded Bowie dies fighting from his hospital bed.
Wayne had long been interested in bringing the Battle of the Alamo to the big screen, and he was involved in most aspects of the filmmaking. In addition to starring in the movie, he served as director and producer and also provided some of the financing. Although the script was heavy-handed at times—with grizzled mountain men emoting about freedom and patriotism—the film was largely entertaining, especially the final battle, which ranks among cinema’s great action sequences. Praise was also extended to Dimitri Tiomkin’s score. At the time of its release, The Alamo received mixed reviews and had limited success at the box office. Some of the negative reception was blamed on an overly aggressive marketing campaign—one that only increased in intensity after the film received seven Academy Award nominations, including a nod for best picture. The backlash mounted after Oscar nominee Chill Wills implied that voting for anyone else would be anti-American. In the end, the film won two Academy Awards, for sound and cinematography.
