The Magnificent Ambersons,  American dramatic film, released in 1942, that was director Orson Welles’s much-anticipated follow-up to his masterpiece Citizen Kane (1941). The film, which was based on the 1918 Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Booth Tarkington, is as infamous for its production problems as it is famous for its artistic merit.
In the early years of the 20th century, the Ambersons are the most socially prominent family in their Indiana town. George Amberson Minafer (played by Tim Holt) is the spoiled heir to the family fortune. Years earlier, his mother, Isabel (Dolores Costello), had not married the man she really loved, inventor Eugene Morgan (Joseph Cotten), who now runs an automobile factory. George falls in love with Eugene’s daughter Lucy (Anne Baxter), but his proposal of marriage is rejected because she dislikes George for having no aspirations other than living the life of the idle rich. After the death of George’s father, Eugene asks Isabel to marry him. George resents Eugene’s attentions toward Isabel and, with the support of his aunt Fanny (Agnes Moorehead), forces his mother to choose between him and Eugene. Isabel picks George and dies soon thereafter. The Amberson fortune dwindles to nothing. George is badly injured in an automobile accident and is reconciled with the Morgans when he asks for Eugene’s forgiveness.
The Magnificent Ambersons deals as much with the changes that the Ambersons (and their town) experience owing to modernization, industrialization, and, especially, the rise of the automobile as with familial relations. When a preview audience reacted poorly to the film, especially its length (about 135 minutes), RKO ordered Welles’s editor, Robert Wise, to cut the film, and it was eventually shortened by nearly 50 minutes. In addition, RKO made assistant director Freddie Fleck and Wise shoot a happier ending. Welles, who was then making a film in Brazil, fought what he saw as the “butchering” of his work but was unable contractually to prevent the changes. An additional indignity from Welles’s perspective was RKO’s decision to release the movie as part of a double feature alongside the B-movie comedy Mexican Spitfire Sees a Ghost. Negatives of the deleted material were later destroyed by RKO, and Welles’s copy of his original cut has never been found. Only stills of the missing scenes remain. Despite the turmoil surrounding its production, the film still garnered four Academy Award nominations and is widely considered a classic.
