The Prisoner of Zenda,  American adventure film, released in 1937, that was based on a stage adaptation of Anthony Hope’s 1894 novel of the same name.
Rudolf Rassendyll (played by Ronald Colman) is an Englishman vacationing in an unnamed central European country, where he attracts stares from locals who mistake him for the country’s soon-to-be-crowned king. Upon noticing Rassendyll at a game reserve, Colonel Zapt (C. Aubrey Smith) and Capt. Fritz von Tarlenheim (David Niven) introduce him to the future monarch (Colman), also named Rudolf, who turns out to be Rassendyll’s distant relative and his exact double. When the royal Rudolf is secretly drugged by the evil duke Michael (Raymond Massey) on the night before his coronation, Rassendyll is called upon to temporarily impersonate him to prevent Michael from usurping the throne. After the coronation, however, Rassendyll discovers that Rudolf has been kidnapped by Michael’s charming but devious henchman, Rupert of Hentzau (Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.), who is holding him in the duke’s castle at Zenda. At the same time, Rassendyll, forced to keep up the ruse, falls in love with Rudolf’s intended bride, Flavia (Madeleine Carroll). After Rupert and Michael fail in separate attempts to seize power, Rassendyll embarks on a mission to rescue Rudolf, with the help of the latter’s mistress, Antoinette (Mary Astor). Amid the ensuing chaos, Rupert stabs Michael; then, following a sword fight with Rassendyll, Rupert jumps into the castle’s moat, leaving Rudolf and Flavia to finally assume the throne.
The film is lively and captivating, with superb fencing scenes and humorous sequences in which Colman must master his alter ego’s personality quirks to avoid detection. The film made Niven a star, and Fairbanks stole nearly every scene in which he appeared. The production, however, had its difficulties, and George Cukor even stepped in as director at one point during filming. Three film versions of the story were shot in the silent era, and a 1952 remake with Stewart Granger was also successful. Peter Sellers starred in a slapstick comedy version of the film in 1979.
