The Sweet Hereafter,  Canadian dramatic film, released in 1997, about a lawyer (Ian Holm) who comes to a small town to sign clients for a lawsuit after a school bus accident. It won the Grand Jury Prize at the Cannes film festival and received Academy Award nominations for best director (Atom Egoyan) and best adapted screenplay (Egoyan). The Sweet Hereafter was nominated for 16 Genie Awards and won eight, including best picture, director, and actor (Holm). It is widely regarded as one of the greatest Canadian films ever made.
Based on the 1991 novel by Russell Banks, The Sweet Hereafter recounts the fictional events leading up to and following a school bus accident that kills 14 children in a small town in the British Columbia interior. The story follows the families whose lives irrevocably change and a big-city lawyer, Mitchell Stephens (Ian Holm), who hopes to sign them up for a class-action lawsuit. In the ensuing atmosphere of suspicion, guilt and doubt, a surviving teenager named Nicole (Sarah Polley), who has lost the use of her legs in the accident, regains her strength and dignity and, by telling a lie, reunites the community.
Banks’s novel was based on a 1989 bus crash in Alton, Texas, that claimed the lives of 21 children and resulted in a series of lucrative settlements that fractured the community. After Egoyan read the book—a birthday gift from his wife, actress Arsinée Khanjian—he felt determined to adapt it but discovered that the American company Fox Searchlight had already optioned it. He met Banks through a mutual friend, author Margaret Atwood, and acquired the rights from him after Searchlight rejected the script they had commissioned and their option expired.
The Sweet Hereafter was the first screenplay that Egoyan adapted from another source. In addition to relocating the action of the novel from upstate New York to the British Columbia interior, he reordered the narrative structure in a non-linear fashion and added readings from The Pied Piper of Hamelin as a framing device. Donald Sutherland was originally cast as Mitchell Stevens, but he withdrew from the film 10 days before shooting began and was replaced by Ian Holm. Egoyan’s adaptation is told from multiple points of view, and the cast, which includes Bruce Greenwood, Tom McCamus, Maury Chaykin, and Khanjian, is impeccable. However, it is Holm’s central performance as the tragic, deeply flawed lawyer that stands out and holds the rest together like a magnet.
Critics greeted The Sweet Hereafter with almost universal praise. The film generated a great deal of positive word of mouth in the United States, culminating in Egoyan’s two Oscar nominations, despite grossing less than $4 million at the North American box office. It also generated controversy and a good deal of critical analysis over its depiction of the incestuous relationship between Nicole and her father (Tom McCamus), which came across to many as consensual.
An earlier version of this entry was published by 
The Canadian Encyclopedia
.
