The Magnificent Seven,  American western film, released in 1960, that—although not as acclaimed as Kurosawa Akira’s Seven Samurai (1954), on which it was based—proved to be a popular and influential entry in the genre.
A Mexican village is being terrorized by the bandit Calvera (played by Eli Wallach) and his gang. In desperation, several of the villagers travel to a Texas border town in hopes of hiring gunslingers to rid them of Calvera. Unable to offer much money, they hire a motley team of men: Chris (Yul Brynner), a fast gun who dresses in black and is the group’s leader; Vin (Steve McQueen), a humorous man who is skilled at gunplay; Bernardo (Charles Bronson), who is financially desperate; Chico (Horst Buchholz), a brash young man eager to earn a reputation for courage; Lee (Robert Vaughn), a once-feared gunslinger who has lost his nerve; Britt (James Coburn), who is as adept with a knife as he is with a pistol; and Harry (Brad Dexter), an opportunistic fortune hunter who mistakenly believes that Chris will lead them to hidden Mexican treasure. The seven men train the villagers in the art of gunplay and successfully repulse attacks from Calvera and his gang. In the final confrontation, the village is freed but at a high cost. Among the seven, only Chris, Vin, and Chico survive the fierce battle.
The Magnificent Seven featured a legendary cast of up-and-coming actors, each of whom imbued his character with memorable traits. A patchwork production, the movie was being rewritten as shooting was under way, but what emerged was a highly entertaining film. Elmer Bernstein’s score is among cinema’s most memorable; the main theme was later featured in commercials for Marlboro cigarettes. The success of The Magnificent Seven inspired several follow-up films. While Brynner starred in Return of the Seven (1966), none of the original cast members appeared in the other sequels, Guns of the Magnificent Seven (1969) and The Magnificent Seven Ride! (1972). The movie also inspired a television series (1998–2000). In 2016 Denzel Washington starred in a remake of the first film.
