The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp,  British romantic drama, released in 1943, that is famous for its lush Technicolor cinematography. It was the first film produced by director Michael Powell and screenwriter Emeric Pressburger after they formed the partnership known as the Archers.
The story takes place during three different years in the life of British military officer Clive Candy (played by Roger Livesey). In 1902 in Berlin, Candy impulsively helps Edith Hunter (Deborah Kerr) combat anti-British propaganda and ends up dueling German officer Theo Kretschmar-Schuldorff (Anton Walbrook). Candy and Theo become friends when they recover in the same hospital, and Theo becomes engaged to Edith. In 1918 Candy, who has since realized that he was in love with Edith, romances nurse Barbara Wynne (Kerr). In a British prisoner-of-war camp, Theo, still feeling the sting of defeat of World War I, initially spurns Candy’s overtures to renew their friendship. In 1942 Theo, an exile from Nazi Germany, tries to convince his doddering old British friend that the honourable methods of warfare they learned as young men have given way to a new form of barbarism. Candy’s driver, “Johnny” Cannon (Kerr), agrees with Theo that Candy must change with the times.
Kerr played three different roles and won praise for her performance. The British government, however, found The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp problematic. The film was based on a character created by political cartoonist David Low; his Colonel Blimp was a caricature of the senior army officer as a reactionary bigoted fool—an image that the British military wished to dispel. The British government also objected to the film’s implication that Candy’s ideals of fighting with honour were outmoded and that victory would require German ruthlessness. Prime Minister Winston Churchill was so outraged that he initially blocked the film’s release in the United States. A shortened version of The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp was finally shown in American theatres in 1945.
