The Treasure of the Sierra Madre,  American adventure film, released in 1948, that was written and directed by John Huston. It has been recognized as one of the first Hollywood movies for which most of the shoot took place on location outside the United States.
Set in Mexico in the 1920s, the film follows two hard-luck Americans, Fred Dobbs (played by Humphrey Bogart) and Bob Curtin (Tim Holt). Cheated out of their wages from a construction job in Tampico, the two team up with Howard (Walter Huston, the director’s father), a wise old prospector, on a quest for gold in the remote Sierra Madre mountains. After fighting off Mexican bandits on the train to Durango, the trio arrives at their destination and eventually discovers a lode of gold in the surrounding mountains. However, Dobbs and Curtin soon become consumed by greed and suspicious of each other’s intentions. They briefly unite with Howard in a plot to kill Cody (Bruce Bennett), a fellow fortune seeker who has arrived in their camp. Shortly thereafter, though, the bandits reappear, and Cody dies in the ensuing gun battle. Meanwhile, Howard saves the life of a local Indian child and returns to the child’s village to be honoured. In his absence, the increasingly paranoid Dobbs shoots Curtin. Although Curtin survives and manages to escape, Dobbs later dies in an attack by the bandits, who mistake the bags of gold dust on his burros as sand and dispose of the bags on the outskirts of town. As Howard and Curtin attempt to retrieve the bags, the gold blows away into the desert, leaving them to laugh ruefully at their fate.
The film was adapted from the novel of the same name (originally published in German as Der Schatz der Sierra Madre [1927]) by B. Traven, a reclusive novelist who lived in Mexico and whose identity has long been shrouded in mystery. (Huston suspected that a representative sent by Traven to oversee the production was Traven himself.) For the production, Huston insisted on filming in the harsh Mexican mountain terrain, and the setting lends authenticity to the rugged tale. His efforts were recognized with Academy Awards for direction and screenplay—the only Oscars he ever won. Bogart gave one of the greatest performances of his career as a decent man driven mad by his desire for wealth. Also superb were Walter Huston, in an Oscar-winning  performance as Howard, and Alfonso Bedoya, as the ruthless bandit leader called Gold Hat.
