The Big Sleep,  American film noir, released in 1946, that was based on Raymond Chandler’s classic 1939 novel of the same name. It was directed by Howard Hawks, cowritten by author William Faulkner, and starred the popular team of Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall. Although its plot is often cited as one of the most baffling in film history, The Big Sleep was deemed culturally significant by the Library of Congress and was added to the National Film Registry in 1997.
Philip Marlowe, the cynical private detective portrayed by Bogart, is hired by the wealthy General Sternwood (played by Charles Waldron) to investigate the person who has been blackmailing him over the gambling debts of his promiscuous but childish daughter Carmen (Martha Vickers). Marlowe is also tasked with finding out what happened to Sean Regan, a friend of the family who investigated a previous blackmailing. While keeping an eye on Carmen, Marlowe falls in love with her protective and mysterious older sister, Vivian (Bacall), and becomes embroiled in a whole host of criminality involving killers, blackmailers, gamblers, and pornographers. Unlike most detective films, the plot focuses on the criminal investigation rather than on solving the crime. At one point during production, the actors, director, and screenwriters were so confused by the plot—especially whether the death of the family chauffeur was a murder or a suicide—Hawks sent a telegram to Chandler asking for help. As the novelist later admitted, “I didn’t know either.”
The homosexuality of one of the characters and the emphasis on pornography in Chandler’s original story ran afoul of Hollywood censors  and had to be toned down for the film adaptation. However, the screenplay is still replete with sexual innuendo, which only heightens the tension and attraction between Bogart and Bacall. Somewhat problematic was Bogart himself, whose deteriorating marriage, affair with Bacall (whom he married in 1945), and increased drinking led to frequent absences from the set, forcing Hawks to shoot scenes around him. Although the film was finished in 1945, studio executives put it on hold while they released a backlog of war movies. During this time Hawks reshot several of the scenes, mainly to improve Bacall’s performance and to emphasize the chemistry between Bogart and Bacall that had been developed in To Have and Have Not (1944). The recut version of The Big Sleep was released to the public in 1946.
