The Silence of the Lambs,  American suspense film, released in 1991, that was the first psychological thriller since Rebecca (1940) to win the Academy Award for best picture. The film’s tight direction and clever script, together with an indelible performance by Anthony Hopkins as a cannibalistic serial killer, resulted in a sweep of the five major Oscars (best picture, best director, best lead actor, best lead actress, and best screenplay [original or adapted]).
As The Silence of the Lambs opens, FBI trainee Clarice Starling (played by Jodie Foster) is summoned to the office of Jack Crawford (Scott Glenn), the head of the Behavioral Science Unit. He wants her to interview the imprisoned serial killer Hannibal “the Cannibal” Lecter (Hopkins) to seek information to help with current cases; Crawford believes that Lecter will be more forthcoming with Starling than he had been with more experienced interlocutors. When Starling arrives at the Baltimore State Hospital, Dr. Chilton (Anthony Heald) warns her of rules to keep her safe when speaking with the resourceful and dangerous Lecter. The case that the FBI wants Lecter’s help in solving is that of “Buffalo Bill,” a serial killer who flays his victims. Lecter offers to help the investigation in return for being transferred to a different facility. In the meantime, Buffalo Bill (Ted Levine) kidnaps Catherine Martin (Brooke Smith), the daughter of a U.S. senator.
Lecter then agrees to give Starling clues to Buffalo Bill’s identity in exchange for personal revelations from her. Chilton, however, seeks to get information from Lecter on his own. Lecter tells Chilton that he will reveal Buffalo Bill’s identity but only if he may travel to Memphis, Tennessee, to speak personally to Senator Martin (Diane Baker). In Memphis, Lecter tells Senator Martin that the killer’s name is really Louis Friend. Starling deduces that that is a lie and visits Lecter where he is being held in Memphis. Lecter gives her the case file that he had received from her earlier before Chilton has Starling removed. Soon thereafter Lecter kills several guards and escapes. Starling tells Crawford that she is in Ohio following a lead that she gleaned from Lecter, but Crawford tells her that they have found that the killer, whose real name is Jame Gumb, is in Illinois and that he and other agents are headed there to arrest him. Starling nevertheless continues to follow her lead, and she finds Gumb and Catherine Martin in Ohio. She manages to kill Gumb and rescue Martin.
The Silence of the Lambs was based on the best-selling 1988 novel of the same name by Thomas Harris. That novel was the second (of four) to centre on Hannibal Lecter. The first, Red Dragon (1981), was filmed as Manhunter in 1986. Gene Hackman was originally slated to direct The Silence of the Lambs, but he dropped out, and Jonathan Demme agreed to helm the movie only after having read the novel. Hopkins reprised his role in Hannibal (2001) and Red Dragon (2002), based on Harris’s novels; neither achieved much success. The Silence of the Lambs was only the third film (after It Happened One Night [1934] and One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest [1975]) to win the top five Oscars.
