True Grit,  American western film, released in 1969, that was a late career triumph for John Wayne, who won his only Academy Award for his performance as the cantankerous U.S. marshal Rooster Cogburn.
Mattie Ross (played by Kim Darby) is a headstrong 14-year-old girl who is determined to find her father’s killer, Tom Chaney (Jeff Corey). She hires the drunken and slovenly Cogburn to help her track Chaney in a remote expanse of wilderness where outlaws roam freely. They are joined by La Boeuf (Glen Campbell), an arrogant young Texas Ranger who wants to arrest Chaney for the murder of a senator in his home state. The trio eventually learns that the killer is riding with a gang led by Ned Pepper (Robert Duvall). During an unexpected encounter, Ross wounds Chaney but is captured by Pepper’s gang. Cogburn and La Boeuf come to her rescue, and, in perhaps the film’s most-memorable scene, Cogburn charges the bandits, holding the horse’s reins between his teeth while wielding a pistol in one hand and a rifle in the other. He kills several of the outlaws, but his horse is shot and collapses, trapping the lawman. La Boeuf saves him from certain death by shooting Pepper but is then mortally wounded by Chaney, who in turn is shot and killed by Cogburn. During the rescue, Ross is bitten by a rattlesnake after falling into a pit, and Cogburn races against time in a successful attempt to save her life.
True Grit, an adaptation of Charles Portis’s novel (1968), was directed by Henry Hathaway, who made a number of films with Wayne. This was arguably their finest collaboration, especially noted for the performance by Wayne, who played against type as the boozy and self-centred Cogburn. However, Campbell and Darby also earned praise, and Elmer Bernstein’s score and title theme are generally considered classics. The movie was a box-office hit and spawned a sequel, Rooster Cogburn (1975), that paired Wayne with Katharine Hepburn. In 2010 the Coen brothers released a critically acclaimed remake of True Grit, with Jeff Bridges as Cogburn and Matt Damon as La Boeuf.
