Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me,  American mystery film, released in 1992, that was directed by David Lynch and served as both a prequel to and a culmination of his television series Twin Peaks (1990–91). In its exploration of horror and abnormal psychological states, the film has affinities with Lynch’s debut feature, Eraserhead (1977).
As the film begins, detectives investigate the strange murder of young prostitute Teresa Banks (played by Pamela Gidley) in a small town in Washington state. The focus then shifts to Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee), a high school pupil in the fictitious community of Twin Peaks, Washington, during the final days of her life. (The discovery of Laura’s dead body was the dramatic catalyst for the TV show.) Although Laura resembles a wholesome American teenager—performing volunteer work and reigning as her school’s homecoming queen—she secretly snorts cocaine and participates in a prostitution ring. After following a hint from an eerie and possibly otherworldly child, Laura begins to suspect that her recurring nightmares of a terrifying demonic figure are in reality her father, Leland (Ray Wise), visiting her in bed and sexually abusing her. Meanwhile, in a flashback, it is revealed that Leland killed Teresa Banks a year earlier, after she had unwittingly invited Laura, an acquaintance of hers, to join them in a sexual rendezvous. (Leland, panic-stricken, leaves the scene before his daughter takes notice of his identity.) Laura’s suspicions are soon confirmed when the demon’s features transform into Leland’s as he rapes her one night. After school the next day Laura escapes to the backwoods cabin of drug dealer Jacques Renault (Walter Olkewicz), but Leland, possessed by an evil spirit, eventually finds her and kills her.
Upon its release Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me received generally negative reviews, as critics complained that the surrealistic narrative was muddled and was lacking in suspense. With limited appeal for those unfamiliar with the TV series, the film fared poorly at the box office as well. Nevertheless, it eventually attracted a cult following—especially among devotees of Lynch and the TV show—with its unsettling stylized atmosphere and its use of intensely subjective perspectives. The film’s ensemble cast notably includes David Bowie and Kiefer Sutherland in small roles as FBI agents.
