Unforgiven,  American revisionist western film, released in 1992, that was directed by and starred Clint Eastwood. It won four Academy Awards as well as both critical and popular praise for its uncompromising approach to the mythology and pathology of the genre in a brutal story that laid bare the emptiness of a life dedicated to violence.
Unforgiven takes place in 1880 and 1881, near the end of the period of the Old West. William Munny (Eastwood) is a former outlaw and gunslinger who has given up that life under the influence of his late wife and has become a hog farmer and father to two children. After a young, myopic would-be gunslinger, the self-proclaimed Schofield Kid (Jaimz Woolvett) arrives to suggest that he and Munny partner up to collect the bounty on the heads of two cowboys who have mutilated the face of a prostitute in the Wyoming town of Big Whiskey, Munny rides out to pick up his old partner, Ned Logan (Morgan Freeman) and join the Schofield Kid on his quest. Meanwhile, another outlaw, English Bob (Richard Harris), arrives in Big Whiskey with his biographer, W.W. Beauchamp (Saul Rubinek) in tow, intent on winning the bounty himself. The town’s sheriff, Little Bill Daggett (Gene Hackman), disarms and viciously beats English Bob and then runs him out of town (leaving Beauchamp behind). Munny, Logan, and the Kid arrive in Big Whiskey shortly thereafter, and Munny is also beaten by Daggett. He is cared for by the prostitutes who are offering the bounty, and once he has recovered, the three men head out to find the offending cowboys. After they have dispatched one of them, Logan loses his stomach for killing and decides to return home. As Munny and the Kid corner and kill the second cowboy, Logan is captured by Daggett’s deputies and taken back to Big Whiskey, where Daggett proceeds to beat him to death; his corpse is displayed in front of the tavern and brothel. Munny then returns to Big Whiskey for revenge. In a climactic gun battle, Munny kills the unarmed tavern owner and five deputies and then savagely murders Daggett.
Eastwood acquired the script of Unforgiven in the early 1980s. He maintained that he held on to it until he was old enough to play the part of Munny. In the credits, Eastwood dedicated the movie to Sergio Leone, who directed him in A Fistful of Dollars (1964), For a Few Dollars More (1965), and The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly (1966), and to Don Siegel, who directed him in Dirty Harry (1971) and Escape from Alcatraz (1979). Eastwood, a major star of long standing who had directed 15 previous films, won his first Oscar for Unforgiven (for best director), which was the third western movie to earn the Academy Award for best picture.
