Zorro,  fictional character created in 1919 by writer Johnston McCulley. The masked, sword-wielding vigilante defends the poor and victimized against the forces of injustice, and his feats have been featured in virtually every form of media.
Zorro, whose name in Spanish means “fox,” was likely based on Mexican folktales of a noble bandit who fought on behalf of the peasantry and indigenous peoples. The character first appeared in McCulley’s serialized five-part story “The Curse of Capistrano,” which was published in the pulp magazine All-Story Weekly beginning in August 1919. Zorro’s true identity is Don Diego Vega (later changed to Don Diego de la Vega), a young nobleman who lived in Los Angeles, California, during the early 19th century when the area was still under Spanish rule. Don Diego became the swordsman Zorro in order to defend the people of Los Angeles from political oppression. Zorro famously uses the letter Z as his “mark,” using his sword to carve it into the clothes—or sometimes the bodies—of his adversaries in three swift strokes. Zorro is not only a master swordsman but a skilled marksman and horseman.
In 1920 Douglas Fairbanks starred in a film adaptation of McCulley’s story, titled The Mark of Zorro, which became a commercial hit and an enduring classic. It was this film that established Zorro’s iconic black costume, which featured a cape, a gaucho hat, and a mask that concealed the top half of his face. As a result of the film’s success, McCulley wrote more than 60 more Zorro stories, starting in 1922; the last was published in 1959, a year after McCulley’s death.
In addition to his success on the printed page, Zorro remained a popular draw at the box office, and Fairbanks returned to the role in a movie sequel, Don Q, Son of Zorro (1925). The 1940 remake of The Mark of Zorro starred Tyrone Power in the title role. In The Mask of Zorro (1998), Anthony Hopkins played an aging Don Diego, who emerges from retirement to train Antonio Banderas’s character to be his successor as Zorro. Banderas reprised that role in The Legend of Zorro in 2005. Zorro’s television appearances included Walt Disney’s Zorro series (1957–59), starring Guy Williams as the masked hero, as well as a syndicated live-action show (1990–93) and numerous animated series.
