Karimojong, also spelled Karamojong,  eastern Nilotic pastoral people of northeastern Uganda. The Karimojong are the largest of a cluster of culturally and historically related peoples, including the Jie, Teso, Dodoth (or Dodos), and Labwor of Uganda and the Turkana of neighbouring Kenya. They speak an Eastern Nilotic language of the Nilo-Saharan language family.
The recent history of the seminomadic, pastoral Karimojong is marked by misfortune: epizootic diseases have decimated cattle herds, locust plagues and drought have caused crop failures and famine, and epidemics have been common. Ivory attracted 19th-century Swahili and European traders, some of whom controlled and plundered the Karimojong.
Cattle are the most valuable and valued assets of the Karimojong, and the possession of cattle is regarded as necessary for both social esteem and personal satisfaction. Herds are divided so that some animals are kept around permanent homesteads for milking while most are sent off to distant pastures, where young men tend them and live off their milk, sometimes supplementing a meagre and monotonous diet with blood obtained by bleeding the cattle. Intertribal cattle raiding has historically been endemic among the Karimojong and neighbouring pastoral peoples. Settled agriculture is increasingly practiced by them, however; fields for sorghum, corn (maize), millet, peanuts (groundnuts), and squash may be plowed by men but are generally tended by women.
Most of the population remains in homesteads protected by heavy, circular fences of stakes. A husband and his wife or wives, their sons, and their wives or a set of brothers inhabit each homestead. Clans are reckoned by patrilineal descent, wives join their husbands’ clans, and cattle are given distinctive clan brands. Hamlets are groups of homesteads whose residents are of mixed clan affiliation; economic and religious cooperation exists within these hamlets. A named generation of 25 to 30 years has a recognized leader, and each generation is divided into three age sets that cut across kin and residence affiliations. Wives and daughters join the age sets of their husbands and fathers and wear the distinctive ornaments of each set.
