Luguru, also called Ruguru, or Waluguru,  a Bantu-speaking people of the hills, Uluguru Mountains, and coastal plains of east-central Tanzania. The Luguru are reluctant to leave the mountain homeland that they have occupied for at least 300 years, despite the relatively serious population pressure in their area and the employment opportunities in the city and on estates. In the late 20th century the Luguru numbered about 1.2 million.
The mountains receive abundant rainfall, and with intensive agriculture (upland rice, sorghum, corn [maize], cassava), including some irrigation from streams, Luguru lands can support upward of 800 people per square mile (300 per square kilometre) in some places. In the lower plains surrounding the Uluguru Mountains many other groups have settled, and generally the Luguru comprise peoples of diverse origins. A common language and culture evolved or was adopted by these settlers, but rough terrain and raiding by neighbours north and south have limited communication among villages.
In the mid-19th century an important east-west caravan route was established around the northern edge of the Uluguru Mountains. The Luguru were periodically raided for slaves by a man named Kisabengo, who founded a fortified village where caravans stopped for supplies and obtained porters; first called Simbamwene, this became the town of Morogoro, which is an important trade centre in modern Tanzania.
The Luguru observe matrilineal descent and recognize about 50 exogamous, noncorporate clans, which are then divided into some 800 lineages identified with lands, leaders, and insignia (stools, staffs, drums). Historically they rarely had a political organization higher than the lineage level, the exception being when a rainmaker might rise in prominence and demand tribute. Neighbouring peoples also sought out Luguru rainmakers. German colonizers imposed a more formal organization, which was continued after World War I, when the British administration chose two “sultans” from among Luguru lineage heads; later subchiefs, headmen, and court officials were named. At independence this system was reorganized, and in 1962 the Tanganyikan government abolished all traditional chiefdoms. The mountain Luguru are now mainly Roman Catholic, while the lowland Luguru are Muslim.
Besides growing crops for their own subsistence, the Luguru export produce to local towns and to Dar es-Salaam. Coffee is grown with some success in the mountains; no cattle are kept because of tsetse fly infestation. Some of the largest sisal estates in Tanzania are in lowlands surrounding Luguru lands, and many non-Luguru have come to work on them. Luguru also sell these people foodstuffs.
