Nyoro, also called Banyoro, Bunyoro, or Kitara,  an Interlacustrine Bantu people living just east of Lake Albert (also called Lake Mobutu Sese Seko), west of the Victoria Nile, in west central Uganda.
In precolonial times, the Nyoro formed one of the most powerful of a number of kingdoms in the area. Until the 18th century the Bunyoro kingdom, as it is called, dominated the surrounding peoples, holding an empire over much of what is now Uganda. In the 18th and 19th centuries, however, the kingdom declined owing to several wars of succession and other internal conflicts, and it surrendered its preeminence to the neighbouring Ganda (Buganda) kingdom.
The ethnic heritage of the Nyoro is complex and includes the descendants of several peoples. Among them are the short, dark-skinned, agricultural Iru, who are in the vast majority; the tall, slender, lighter skinned, pastoral Hima, who historically dominated the Iru in the southern part of the Bunyoro area; and the Bito, a Luo-speaking Nilotic people who held a similarly privileged position in the north and also provided the ruler of the state, the mukama.
In the 1890s, after the defeat of the Nyoro king Mukama Kabarega, British troops subdued the Bunyoro (or Banyoro) kingdom and brought it into the Uganda Protectorate. Bito kings then continued to reign in the Bunyoro kingdom until it was abolished in 1966 by the Ugandan government.
The Nyoro live in scattered settlements on a well-watered, fertile plateau. Their population density is considerably less than that of neighbouring peoples, in part because the Murchison Falls (now Kabarega) National Park that was created in the north of their land is an area of large numbers of tsetse flies—hence, the incidence of sleeping sickness is much higher. Nyoro observe patrilineal descent and are divided into a number of exogamous clans.
Many Nyoro are small-scale rural farmers whose crops include millet, sorghum, plantains, yams, squash, cassava, and peanuts (groundnuts). Cotton and tobacco are also grown in lower areas as cash crops, and property rights for land have been a significant local issue since late colonial years. The waters of Lake Albert are fished, and prior to the colonial period Nyoro were great hunters of elephant and other game and used a complex system of pits, nets, and snares. Hunting was restricted by the British, and the large herds of game were decimated during Uganda’s political instability of the 1970s and ’80s. Early Nyoro blacksmiths fashioned a variety of tools and weapons from locally obtained iron ore smelted in pit furnaces. Cowry shells and other currency items were used by the Nyoro in an elaborate exchange system. Many of these skills and organizational forms have now been lost.
