Mad Men,  American television drama series that aired (2007–15) on the American Movie Classics (AMC) cable network and was widely praised for its nuanced representation of social life in the 1960s and for its stylish visual flair.
The show was created by Matthew Weiner, who had previously served as a writer and a producer on several TV series, most notably The Sopranos. Mad Men’s first season, set in 1960, introduced viewers to Don Draper (played by Jon Hamm), the handsome and talented creative director of New York City advertising agency Sterling Cooper. (The show’s title was a reference to the denizens of Madison Avenue, the Manhattan street where many advertising companies have traditionally been located.) Among Don’s coworkers there are the devilishly affable Roger Sterling (John Slattery), a partner at the firm; the ambitious young account executive Pete Campbell (Vincent Kartheiser); and the effortlessly savvy head secretary, Joan Holloway (Christina Hendricks). While the show generated many of its story lines from the lively dynamics of the office, it also focused intently on the domestic sphere and specifically on Don’s wife, Betty (January Jones), who superficially embodied the ideal of the mid-century suburban housewife.
As the series progressed, it skillfully explored the complexities of its characters and their professional and personal travails. Though Don’s life is often looked upon with envy or admiration, early in the narrative he is dissatisfied in his marriage (from which he frequently strays) and burdened by a secret about his past. (The revelation that Don had stolen the identity of a fellow soldier in the Korean War was one of the show’s major plot points.) For many viewers, however, the most compelling aspect of Mad Men was its historical setting. With each season structured around a successive time frame within the 1960s, the show—which by the seventh season had advanced to 1969—took pains to faithfully depict the era’s rapidly changing fashions and social mores, from attitudes toward alcohol to philosophies on parenting. The narrative arc of another principal character—the spirited Peggy Olson (Elisabeth Moss), who starts as Don’s secretary but soon becomes one of Sterling Cooper’s most proficient copywriters—served in part as an illustration of the decade’s expanding opportunities for women. As well, the series provided a lens through which to observe the broad transformations that occurred within advertising and consumer culture at that time. The consequences of this tumultuous milieu were far-reaching. Within the show’s run, Don and Betty divorce and each remarries, and the agency also dissolves, reorganizing first as Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce and then, after a merger, as Sterling Cooper & Partners.
From its outset, Mad Men was much lauded by critics, and its devoted cadre of fans elevated it to the level of a cultural phenomenon. For each of its first four seasons, the program received the Emmy Award for outstanding drama series, and it also captured three Golden Globe Awards for best television drama series.
