Kingston upon Hull, also called Hull,  city and unitary authority, geographic county of East Riding of Yorkshire, historic county of Yorkshire, northeastern England. It lies on the north bank of the River Humber estuary at its junction with the River Hull, 22 miles (35 km) from the North Sea.
Hull was a medieval wool port that passed from the monks of Meaux Abbey to Edward I, king of England, in 1293. Edward renamed the town Kingston upon Hull. It prospered as the chief seaport for the shipping on the inland waterways that converge on the estuary of the River Humber. The town was confined to its medieval site until the late 18th century, when rapid expansion generated development to the north and west and, more recently, to the east.
Hull is a major international seaport, with 7 miles (11 km) of modern docks along the Humber. The port serves Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and the East Midlands. Hull’s smaller docks, including St. Andrews Dock, have been closed, forcing the fishing fleet long based there to use the nearby Albert Dock, with a riverside quay west of the River Hull. The newer, larger docks east of the River Hull (built 1886–1970) accommodate large oceangoing vessels with inbound cargoes of timber, grain, oilseeds, foodstuffs, and wool and exports of manufactured goods. Port-based industries, the manufacture of chemicals, the processing of timber and food, and beverage making are concentrated in the older docks area, but other industry utilizes open land in the north. Extraction and processing of oil and gas from the North Sea are important to the city’s economy.
The medieval city retains a number of historic buildings, including the large parish church of Holy Trinity, Wilberforce House (birthplace of William Wilberforce, the emancipator), and Trinity House (a navigation school). Museums, an art gallery, a theatre, and an arts centre are in close proximity to the old town, and a college of higher education overlooks the Queen’s Gardens (site of the first dock, which was built in 1778). The University of Hull (1927) occupies a more open site in the north.
Inadequate communications in the past prevented Kingston upon Hull from developing a hinterland south of the Humber, but the opening in 1981 of the Humber Bridge west of the city’s boundary—at 4,626 feet (1,410 metres) in length, the longest suspension-bridge span in the United Kingdom—enhanced its status as a regional commercial and cultural centre. Area 27 square miles (71 square km). Pop. (2001) 243,589; (2011) 256,406.
