Germaine Greer,  (born January 29, 1939, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia), Australian-born English writer and feminist who championed the sexual freedom of women.
Greer was educated at the Universities of Melbourne and Sydney before taking a doctorate in 1967 in literature at the University of Cambridge. She acted on television, wrote for journals, and lectured at the University of Warwick until her influential first book, The Female Eunuch (1970), was published. It postulates that passivity in women’s sexuality is a characteristic associated with a castrate, hence the title, and is a role foisted on them by history and by women themselves. Never shy of controversy, Greer debated author Norman Mailer on the topic of women’s liberation in April 1971 at New York City’s Town Hall. The debate was the subject of the 1979 documentary Town Bloody Hall. Greer moved to Italy and continued to lecture, but she later returned to England.
Greer’s other books included The Obstacle Race: The Fortunes of Women Painters and Their Work (1979), Sex and Destiny: The Politics of Human Fertility (1984), The Change: Women, Ageing and the Menopause (1991), and Slip-shod Sibyls: Recognition, Rejection, and the Woman Poet (1995). In 1999 she published The Whole Woman, in which she criticized many of the supposed gains of the women’s movement as being handed down by the male establishment. Her revisionist biography of Anne Hathaway, Shakespeare’s Wife (2007), casts doubt on earlier portrayals of Hathaway as being little more than an illiterate seductress with whom Shakespeare had an unhappy marriage; it was well received by critics. The memoir White Beech: The Rainforest Years (2013) documents her efforts to restore a plot of rainforest that she purchased in 2001.
By the 1990s and into the 21st century, Greer had furthered her reputation for being both outspoken and unexpected. In 1994 she extended an open invitation for homeless people to stay at her home near Cambridge but rescinded the offer after a journalist disguised himself in order to gain entrance. In 2003 she published the essay “Whitefella Jump Up,” which argues that Australia should become an aboriginal republic. In 2005 she appeared on the British reality television show Celebrity Big Brother, where she participated in humiliating tasks that many believed did not befit a well-known scholar. In 2006 and 2007, respectively, she was criticized for publicly questioning the posthumous fame of Steve Irwin and Diana, princess of Wales.
